lectures/01.intro.md, before:

# Game Engine Architecture

## Introduction

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# What's this course about?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Game development

* How does a game team look like?
* How does a commercially-successful game engine look like?
* Is Unreal Engine 4 *awesome*? (hint: yes, yes it is)
* How do you write code for games?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Who should visit the course?

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Programmers.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* We'll focus on programming
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> We'll only spend some itty-bitty time discussing game design and content creation (they deserve a course of their own!)
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> But you'll get to see how awesome UE4 is
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> We'll make it hard to you

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Required knowledge

* OOP with C++
  - We'll review and extend some C++ concepts
* Data structures
* First-year math - analytical geometry, linear algebra, basic calculus

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Why do we do it?

* We like torturing people
* We'd love to see more game developers
* We think you might like it

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Shameless advertisement time

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Ubisoft

![Ubi games](resources/01.intro/ubisoft_game_collage.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Ubisoft

![Ubi map](resources/01.intro/ubisoft_studio_map.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<!-- .slide: data-background="url(resources/01.intro/ac_origins_poster.jpg)" data-background-repeat="no-repeat" data-background-size="cover" data-background-position="center center" class="high-contrast-text" -->
### Ubisoft Sofia

* Founded 2006
* 230+ employees
* All production teams on-site - programming to design to art
* Lead or associate studio for world-renown franchises like Assassin's Creed & Tom Clancy

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<!-- .slide: data-background="url(resources/01.intro/cryowar_cover.png)" data-background-repeat="no-repeat" data-background-size="cover" data-background-position="center center" class="high-contrast-text" -->

### Kipi Interactive

* Start-up working on a mobile top-down shooter
* Founded by Viktor
* Team of 10
* UE4-based

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Course contents

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Preliminaries

1. Introduction to the course
1. Fundamentals of computer games
1. A little bit of math
1. Architecture of a game

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Low-level systems

1. Fundamental game engine systems
1. Tools for debugging
1. Rendering primitives and associated systems

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---
## Advanced systems

1. High level rendering systems
1. Animation systems
1. Physics
1. UI
1. Audio
1. Gameplay
1. AI
1. Networking
1. Plugins for Unreal Engine 4

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Course structure

* 3 hours of theoretical game engine architecture
* 2 hours of Unreal Engine 4 goodness

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Grading

* 2 tests * 20% = 40%
    * 2 bonuses * 5% = 10%
* 1 homework/mini cource project * 20% = 20%
* 1 course project * 40% = 40%
    * 1 bonus * 10% = 10%


<br>
* Absence from lectures will not be punished
* Presence in lectures will not be rewarded (grade-wise)
* LIMITED OFFER, ONLY IN THE NEXT 15 WEEKS - Cheat once,
be banned to the ethereal world until next September!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Communication

* However you see fit (email, social, GitHub)
* All of us are open to talking - make use of it
  - (and we are VERY open to beer and whiskey)
* We make mistakes, do say when you spot one

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Communication

* Homepage: [http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)
  * I know, I know, we need to buy a domain
* Facebook group: [https://www.facebook.com/groups/1682570168689369/](https://www.facebook.com/groups/1682570168689369/)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Literature

* [Game Engine Architecture, Jason Gregory, Lead in Naughty Dog (Uncharted)](http://www.gameenginebook.com/)
* [Effective C++, Scott Meyers](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920033707.do)
* [Game coding complete, Mike McShaffry & David Graham](http://www.amazon.com/Game-Coding-Complete-Fourth-Edition/dp/1133776574)
* [*Game Programming Gems* series](http://www.satori.org/game-programming-gems/)
* [Collection of Game Development books](https://miloyip.github.io/game-programmer/game-programmer.svg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Game development is

* ...damn fun
* ...incredibly rewarding
* ...an art form

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* ...incredibly time-consuming

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* ...harder than mainstream programming [(ask SpaceX)](http://www.fastcompany.com/3031512/why-spacex-and-other-non-gaming-companies-are-scouting-talent-at-e3)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# A game dev team

* Developers<sup>1</sup>
  - Game
  - Engine
  - Tools
* Designers (Game designers, level designers)
* Artists (Concept Artists, Modelers, Animators, Writers, Composers, Actors)

<sup>1</sup> Can be further specialized into subsystems.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# How is a game created?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Three phases:

* Pre-production
* Production
* Post-production

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Pre-production

* Idea - 'I wanna make a game MMO-fighter game!'
* Pitch - 'I can make this game make money because...'
* Concept & prototypes
  * 'This game will have...and the player will...and players will like it because...'
  * The birth of a game design document
  * Paper & pen to simple video game prototype

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Production

The actual development of the game. It is continuous and iterative process.
Changes happen all the time.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Design <--> Programming

* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Creative directors decide the overall direction
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> Game designers come up with mechanics
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> Gameplay programmers program the mechanics
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" --> Engine programmers program the platform for the mechanics

<br>
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="4" --> Level designers setup the environment
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" --> Quest designers script missions
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="6" --> Tool programmers program the instrumentarium for everyone

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### (Visual) Art Production

* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Art directors decide the overall direction
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> Concept artists conceptualize the character / item / place
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> Modelers build a 3D model
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" --> Texturists / Lightning artists color it
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="4" --> Animators and mocap team make it move

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" --> Repeat for other forms of art (sound, cinematics, storyline)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

The game is constantly played, tested, changed

* don't break the build pls = waste of time for the entire studio

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Milestones

- First playable
- Alpha
- Beta
- Data freeze
- Gold master
- Day 0 patch?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Post-production

- Maintenance
- DLCss
- Additional platforms

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Why make games as business?

It's ~~not~~ about the money

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Let's talk statistics.

* 2.5 billion gamers worldwide (console / mobile / PC)
* Games earn 3 times more than movies (~$150b)

![Market size](resources/01.intro/games_vs_entertainment.jpeg.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Games are played everywhere

![Market size](resources/01.intro/global_game_market_size.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<iframe src="https://e.infogram.com/5e47982f-acc5-45a7-a310-c86b5ba78dfb?src=embed" title="top countries by game revenue" width="750" height="683" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border:none;" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen"></iframe>

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<iframe src="https://e.infogram.com/f6f8d00a-4334-4279-b1d5-dd86ece01936?src=embed" title="The Worldwide Revenue of Gaming Video Content in billion U.S. dollars (2016 to 2019)" width="750" height="671" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border:none;" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen"></iframe>

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<iframe src="https://e.infogram.com/d5f6d744-b872-4aa7-9a12-1aeb81676822?src=embed" title="The Worldwide Revenue of eSports Market in Million U.S. Dollars (2012 to 2021)" width="750" height="671" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border:none;" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen"></iframe>

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Some facts from the USA/Europe (2018)

* 70% of gamers are 18 or older, 11% are over 50
* Average age is 34 years and going up
* Women 33%
* Boys under 18 - 17%

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

The point

* Games are played everywhere
* Games are played by everyone
* The market keeps on growing with double digits

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# What's a game?

* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> A game is a structured form of play, usually undertaken for enjoyment and sometimes used as an educational tool.
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> *'A series of interesting choices'* - Sid Meiers
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> A
  * **soft-realtime**,
  * **interactive**,
  * **agent-based**
  * **simulation**

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Soft-realtime

* It is important to draw at 60fps (90 / 120 for VR)
* Nobody dies if you miss a frame or have a bug

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Interactive

* Respond to player input immediately

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Agent-based

* Player vs the world

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Simulation

* Photo-realistic graphics
* Believable physics
* Challenging AI

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Game engines

* A game engine is a framework for creating games that provides
common reusable functionality
* Often genre-specific
* Writing a engine from a scratch is a huge effort - *don't* do it
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Seriously - don't

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> For real though, don't build your own engine, build a game!

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> ![Shaming the lecturer's own engine](resources/01.intro/zmey_shaming.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Game Engine requirements

* Vary between genres
  - compare open-world games vs fighting games

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![WoW](resources/01.intro/wow_vs_tekken.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Performance
  - Frames per second >= 60 --> you only have 16 ms!
  - *Very easy* to mess up
  - *Very hard* to get right

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Graphics

![Graphics modes](resources/01.intro/graphics_modes.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Player input

![Input hardware](resources/01.intro/input.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Target hardware
    - Build once, run everywhere
    - Desktop platforms, consoles, mobile
    - STL?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Artists-and-designer-friendly
    - Non-programmers should also be able to use the engine
    - Designers need editors and scripting languages
    - Artists need a sensible asset pipeline
    - Users shouldn't have to wait an eternity to load a file

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Editor](resources/01.intro/unity_editor_ui.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Engine structure

[Click me](resources/01.intro/runtime_arch.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Hardware, OS, drivers and compilers
  - All platforms have an SDK of their own
  - Different compilers are needed (or better optimized) for specific platforms (i.e. MSVC is better than clang and gcc on Windows)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Third party middleware
  - Standard library
  - Low-level graphics API - DirectX, OpenGL, Metal, GLES
  - Physics simulation - Havok, PhysX, Bullet

![Third party](resources/01.intro/thirdparty_sdks.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Platform-independence layer = Standard library++

![Platform-independence layer](resources/01.intro/platform_indepedence_layer.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Core systems

![Core systems](resources/01.intro/engine_core_systems.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Asset pipeline

![Asset pipeline](resources/01.intro/asset_pipeline.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Rendering = Low-level primitives + Scene + VFX

![Low-level renderer](resources/01.intro/low_level_rendering.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![High-level renderer](resources/01.intro/high_level_rendering.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Physics

![Physics}](resources/01.intro/physics.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Gameplay systems - Game object model vs. Software object model

![Gameplay](resources/01.intro/gameplay_systems.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Game frontend

![Game frontend](resources/01.intro/frontend.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Tools - separate vs. on-shared-framework vs. in-game
  - Separate

![Tools](resources/01.intro/tools_full_separation.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* On-shared-framework

![Tools](resources/01.intro/tools_protocol_separation.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Stacked

![Tools](resources/01.intro/tools_stacked_separation.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Game Engine Survey

## Unreal Engine 4

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/0zjPiGVSnfI" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Pros

* Most sophisticated "free" engine on the market
* King of graphics
* *Awesome* architecture
* Huge community
* Open-source
* [A ton of your favourite games have been made with it](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Unreal_Engine_games)
| Batman: Arkham Foo | Gears of War
| Mass Effect | Bioshock
| Borderlands | Tom Clancy
| Deus Ex
* [Unreal Dev Grants](https://www.unrealengine.com/unrealdevgrants)


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Cons

* *Insufficient* docs
* Lack of teaching materials
* *Steep* learning curve
* Being C++, compile times can become terrible

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Unity3D

![Blacksmith shaders](https://unity3d.com/profiles/unity3d/themes/unity/images/pages/the-blacksmith/full/unique_shadows.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Pros

* [King in the mobile / indie department](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Unity_games)
  - Hearthstone: Heroes of Warcraft
  - Kerbal Space Program
  - Ori and the Blind Forest
* Good looking graphics
* Easy to start
* *Very* quick iteration
* Huge community
* Much cheaper than UE4

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Cons

* Can't break in the AAA sector - Previously there were problems with rendering quality, extensibility, openness, tools seem lacking.
* Today (almost) everything is addressed and the engine is fastly evolving and starting to gain more traction

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## [Other notable engines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_game_engines)

| Engine                   | Producer   | License      | Notable games                 |
| ------------------------ | ---------- | ------------ | ------------------------------|
| Lumberyard               | Amazon     | Free         | Star Citizen                  |
| Godot                    | Community  | Free         | Small indie games             |
| CryEngine                | Crytek     | Subscription | Crysis, Evolve                |
| Frostbite                | EA         | Proprietary  | Dragon Age, Battlefield, FIFA |
| Decima                   | Guerrilla  | Proprietary  | Horizon Zero Dawn             |
| Anvil / Dunia / Snowdrop | Ubisoft    | Proprietary  | (Almost) Every Ubisoft Game   |
| RAGE                     | Rockstar   | Proprietary  | GTA                           |
| Creation                 | Bethesda   | Proprietary  | Skyrim, Fallout IV            |
| Gamemaker Studio         | YoYo Games | Crappy       | None interesting              |

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Tools of the trade

* Source control - Git vs. Perforce
* IDE - Visual Studio vs. N/A
* Debuggers & Profilers - to be discussed later in the course

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

For the duration of the course you want to have this installed:

* VS 2017/2019 Community Edition
* Git
* Unreal Engine 4 (no need to hurry, more details next time)
* [Optional] Blender & Audacity - if you plan on creating content

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Reminder: The ~~hunger~~ course games are now on, make sure you are up to the challenge.

Commit message:

Added quote from kotaku about engines

lectures/01.intro.md, after:

# Game Engine Architecture

## Introduction

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# What's this course about?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Game development

* How does a game team look like?
* How does a commercially-successful game engine look like?
* Is Unreal Engine 4 *awesome*? (hint: yes, yes it is)
* How do you write code for games?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Who should visit the course?

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Programmers.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* We'll focus on programming
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> We'll only spend some itty-bitty time discussing game design and content creation (they deserve a course of their own!)
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> But you'll get to see how awesome UE4 is
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> We'll make it hard to you

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Required knowledge

* OOP with C++
  - We'll review and extend some C++ concepts
* Data structures
* First-year math - analytical geometry, linear algebra, basic calculus

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Why do we do it?

* We like torturing people
* We'd love to see more game developers
* We think you might like it

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Shameless advertisement time

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Ubisoft

![Ubi games](resources/01.intro/ubisoft_game_collage.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Ubisoft

![Ubi map](resources/01.intro/ubisoft_studio_map.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<!-- .slide: data-background="url(resources/01.intro/ac_origins_poster.jpg)" data-background-repeat="no-repeat" data-background-size="cover" data-background-position="center center" class="high-contrast-text" -->
### Ubisoft Sofia

* Founded 2006
* 230+ employees
* All production teams on-site - programming to design to art
* Lead or associate studio for world-renown franchises like Assassin's Creed & Tom Clancy

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<!-- .slide: data-background="url(resources/01.intro/cryowar_cover.png)" data-background-repeat="no-repeat" data-background-size="cover" data-background-position="center center" class="high-contrast-text" -->

### Kipi Interactive

* Start-up working on a mobile top-down shooter
* Founded by Viktor
* Team of 10
* UE4-based

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Course contents

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Preliminaries

1. Introduction to the course
1. Fundamentals of computer games
1. A little bit of math
1. Architecture of a game

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Low-level systems

1. Fundamental game engine systems
1. Tools for debugging
1. Rendering primitives and associated systems

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---
## Advanced systems

1. High level rendering systems
1. Animation systems
1. Physics
1. UI
1. Audio
1. Gameplay
1. AI
1. Networking
1. Plugins for Unreal Engine 4

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Course structure

* 3 hours of theoretical game engine architecture
* 2 hours of Unreal Engine 4 goodness

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Grading

* 2 tests * 20% = 40%
    * 2 bonuses * 5% = 10%
* 1 homework/mini cource project * 20% = 20%
* 1 course project * 40% = 40%
    * 1 bonus * 10% = 10%


<br>
* Absence from lectures will not be punished
* Presence in lectures will not be rewarded (grade-wise)
* LIMITED OFFER, ONLY IN THE NEXT 15 WEEKS - Cheat once,
be banned to the ethereal world until next September!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Communication

* However you see fit (email, social, GitHub)
* All of us are open to talking - make use of it
  - (and we are VERY open to beer and whiskey)
* We make mistakes, do say when you spot one

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Communication

* Homepage: [http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)
  * I know, I know, we need to buy a domain
* Facebook group: [https://www.facebook.com/groups/1682570168689369/](https://www.facebook.com/groups/1682570168689369/)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Literature

* [Game Engine Architecture, Jason Gregory, Lead in Naughty Dog (Uncharted)](http://www.gameenginebook.com/)
* [Effective C++, Scott Meyers](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920033707.do)
* [Game coding complete, Mike McShaffry & David Graham](http://www.amazon.com/Game-Coding-Complete-Fourth-Edition/dp/1133776574)
* [*Game Programming Gems* series](http://www.satori.org/game-programming-gems/)
* [Collection of Game Development books](https://miloyip.github.io/game-programmer/game-programmer.svg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Game development is

* ...damn fun
* ...incredibly rewarding
* ...an art form

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* ...incredibly time-consuming

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* ...harder than mainstream programming [(ask SpaceX)](http://www.fastcompany.com/3031512/why-spacex-and-other-non-gaming-companies-are-scouting-talent-at-e3)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# A game dev team

* Developers<sup>1</sup>
  - Game
  - Engine
  - Tools
* Designers (Game designers, level designers)
* Artists (Concept Artists, Modelers, Animators, Writers, Composers, Actors)

<sup>1</sup> Can be further specialized into subsystems.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# How is a game created?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Three phases:

* Pre-production
* Production
* Post-production

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Pre-production

* Idea - 'I wanna make a game MMO-fighter game!'
* Pitch - 'I can make this game make money because...'
* Concept & prototypes
  * 'This game will have...and the player will...and players will like it because...'
  * The birth of a game design document
  * Paper & pen to simple video game prototype

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Production

The actual development of the game. It is continuous and iterative process.
Changes happen all the time.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Design <--> Programming

* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Creative directors decide the overall direction
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> Game designers come up with mechanics
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> Gameplay programmers program the mechanics
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" --> Engine programmers program the platform for the mechanics

<br>
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="4" --> Level designers setup the environment
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" --> Quest designers script missions
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="6" --> Tool programmers program the instrumentarium for everyone

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### (Visual) Art Production

* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Art directors decide the overall direction
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> Concept artists conceptualize the character / item / place
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> Modelers build a 3D model
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" --> Texturists / Lightning artists color it
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="4" --> Animators and mocap team make it move

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" --> Repeat for other forms of art (sound, cinematics, storyline)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

The game is constantly played, tested, changed

* don't break the build pls = waste of time for the entire studio

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Milestones

- First playable
- Alpha
- Beta
- Data freeze
- Gold master
- Day 0 patch?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Post-production

- Maintenance
- DLCss
- Additional platforms

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Why make games as business?

It's ~~not~~ about the money

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Let's talk statistics.

* 2.5 billion gamers worldwide (console / mobile / PC)
* Games earn 3 times more than movies (~$150b)

![Market size](resources/01.intro/games_vs_entertainment.jpeg.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Games are played everywhere

![Market size](resources/01.intro/global_game_market_size.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<iframe src="https://e.infogram.com/5e47982f-acc5-45a7-a310-c86b5ba78dfb?src=embed" title="top countries by game revenue" width="750" height="683" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border:none;" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen"></iframe>

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<iframe src="https://e.infogram.com/f6f8d00a-4334-4279-b1d5-dd86ece01936?src=embed" title="The Worldwide Revenue of Gaming Video Content in billion U.S. dollars (2016 to 2019)" width="750" height="671" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border:none;" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen"></iframe>

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<iframe src="https://e.infogram.com/d5f6d744-b872-4aa7-9a12-1aeb81676822?src=embed" title="The Worldwide Revenue of eSports Market in Million U.S. Dollars (2012 to 2021)" width="750" height="671" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="border:none;" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen"></iframe>

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Some facts from the USA/Europe (2018)

* 70% of gamers are 18 or older, 11% are over 50
* Average age is 34 years and going up
* Women 33%
* Boys under 18 - 17%

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

The point

* Games are played everywhere
* Games are played by everyone
* The market keeps on growing with double digits

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# What's a game?

* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> A game is a structured form of play, usually undertaken for enjoyment and sometimes used as an educational tool.
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> *'A series of interesting choices'* - Sid Meiers
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> A
  * **soft-realtime**,
  * **interactive**,
  * **agent-based**
  * **simulation**

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Soft-realtime

* It is important to draw at 60fps (90 / 120 for VR)
* Nobody dies if you miss a frame or have a bug

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Interactive

* Respond to player input immediately

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Agent-based

* Player vs the world

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Simulation

* Photo-realistic graphics
* Believable physics
* Challenging AI

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Game engines

* A game engine is a framework for creating games that provides
common reusable functionality
* Often genre-specific
* Writing a engine from a scratch is a huge effort - *don't* do it
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Seriously - don't

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> For real though, don't build your own engine, build a game!

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> ![Shaming the lecturer's own engine](resources/01.intro/zmey_shaming.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Game Engine requirements

* Vary between genres
  - compare open-world games vs fighting games

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![WoW](resources/01.intro/wow_vs_tekken.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Performance
  - Frames per second >= 60 --> you only have 16 ms!
  - *Very easy* to mess up
  - *Very hard* to get right

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Graphics

![Graphics modes](resources/01.intro/graphics_modes.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Player input

![Input hardware](resources/01.intro/input.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Target hardware
    - Build once, run everywhere
    - Desktop platforms, consoles, mobile
    - STL?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Artists-and-designer-friendly
    - Non-programmers should also be able to use the engine
    - Designers need editors and scripting languages
    - Artists need a sensible asset pipeline
    - Users shouldn't have to wait an eternity to load a file

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Editor](resources/01.intro/unity_editor_ui.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Engine structure

[Click me](resources/01.intro/runtime_arch.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Hardware, OS, drivers and compilers
  - All platforms have an SDK of their own
  - Different compilers are needed (or better optimized) for specific platforms (i.e. MSVC is better than clang and gcc on Windows)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Third party middleware
  - Standard library
  - Low-level graphics API - DirectX, OpenGL, Metal, GLES
  - Physics simulation - Havok, PhysX, Bullet

![Third party](resources/01.intro/thirdparty_sdks.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Platform-independence layer = Standard library++

![Platform-independence layer](resources/01.intro/platform_indepedence_layer.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Core systems

![Core systems](resources/01.intro/engine_core_systems.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Asset pipeline

![Asset pipeline](resources/01.intro/asset_pipeline.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Rendering = Low-level primitives + Scene + VFX

![Low-level renderer](resources/01.intro/low_level_rendering.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![High-level renderer](resources/01.intro/high_level_rendering.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Physics

![Physics}](resources/01.intro/physics.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Gameplay systems - Game object model vs. Software object model

![Gameplay](resources/01.intro/gameplay_systems.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Game frontend

![Game frontend](resources/01.intro/frontend.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Tools - separate vs. on-shared-framework vs. in-game
  - Separate

![Tools](resources/01.intro/tools_full_separation.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* On-shared-framework

![Tools](resources/01.intro/tools_protocol_separation.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Stacked

![Tools](resources/01.intro/tools_stacked_separation.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Game Engine Survey

## Unreal Engine 4

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/0zjPiGVSnfI" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Pros

* Most sophisticated "free" engine on the market
* King of graphics
* *Awesome* architecture
* Huge community
* Open-source
* [A ton of your favourite games have been made with it](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Unreal_Engine_games)
| Batman: Arkham Foo | Gears of War
| Mass Effect | Bioshock
| Borderlands | Tom Clancy
| Deus Ex
* [Unreal Dev Grants](https://www.unrealengine.com/unrealdevgrants)


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Cons

* *Insufficient* docs
* Lack of teaching materials
* *Steep* learning curve
* Being C++, compile times can become terrible

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Unity3D

![Blacksmith shaders](https://unity3d.com/profiles/unity3d/themes/unity/images/pages/the-blacksmith/full/unique_shadows.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Pros

* [King in the mobile / indie department](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Unity_games)
  - Hearthstone: Heroes of Warcraft
  - Kerbal Space Program
  - Ori and the Blind Forest
* Good looking graphics
* Easy to start
* *Very* quick iteration
* Huge community
* Much cheaper than UE4

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Cons

* Can't break in the AAA sector - Previously there were problems with rendering quality, extensibility, openness, tools seem lacking.
* Today (almost) everything is addressed and the engine is fastly evolving and starting to gain more traction

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## [Other notable engines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_game_engines)

| Engine                   | Producer   | License      | Notable games                 |
| ------------------------ | ---------- | ------------ | ------------------------------|
| Lumberyard               | Amazon     | Free         | Star Citizen                  |
| Godot                    | Community  | Free         | Small indie games             |
| CryEngine                | Crytek     | Subscription | Crysis, Evolve                |
| Frostbite                | EA         | Proprietary  | Dragon Age, Battlefield, FIFA |
| Decima                   | Guerrilla  | Proprietary  | Horizon Zero Dawn             |
| Anvil / Dunia / Snowdrop | Ubisoft    | Proprietary  | (Almost) Every Ubisoft Game   |
| RAGE                     | Rockstar   | Proprietary  | GTA                           |
| Creation                 | Bethesda   | Proprietary  | Skyrim, Fallout IV            |
| Gamemaker Studio         | YoYo Games | Crappy       | None interesting              |

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Quote from [Kotaku Article](https://kotaku.com/the-story-behind-mass-effect-andromedas-troubled-five-1795886428)

While describing Frostbite, one top developer on Mass Effect: Andromeda used the analogy of an automobile. Epic’s Unreal Engine, that developer said, is like an SUV, capable of doing lots of things but unable to go at crazy high speeds. The Unity Engine would be a compact car: small, weak, and easy to fit anyplace you’d like. “Frostbite,” the developer said, “is a sports car. Not even a sports car, a Formula 1. When it does something well, it does it extremely well. When it doesn’t do something, it really doesn’t do something.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Tools of the trade

* Source control - Git vs. Perforce
* IDE - Visual Studio vs. N/A
* Debuggers & Profilers - to be discussed later in the course

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

For the duration of the course you want to have this installed:

* VS 2017/2019 Community Edition
* Git
* Unreal Engine 4 (no need to hurry, more details next time)
* [Optional] Blender & Audacity - if you plan on creating content

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Reminder: The ~~hunger~~ course games are now on, make sure you are up to the challenge.
