lectures/04.fundamentals_ue4.md, before:

# Game Engine Architecture

## UE4 Fundamentals

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

```cpp
class Human
{
  private:
    PointerType1<HumanBody> m_Body;
    PointerType2<House> m_Home;
    PointerType3<SubwayStation> m_NearestSubwayStation;
};
```
What should `PointerType1`, `PointerType2` and `PointerType3` be?

1. <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> `std::unique_ptr` because the person owns his body
2. <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> `std::shared_ptr` because the home may be shared by family members (and the municipality!)
3. <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> Naked pointer because the person only uses the subway, he has no control over it

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

```cpp
char buffer[256];
auto player = new (buffer) Player;
```

What does this do?

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Constructs `player` in the memory allocated by `buffer`.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

TBD / TODO:
HEAVILY REDUCE THE MODULE TALKING IN HERE / ADD AN EXERCISE ON HOW TO USE CONTAINERS, POINTERS AND LOGGING IN A TRIVIAL GAME
TO GET THEM USED TO THE ENGINE

Last time on...'How I met your ~~mother~~ game engine'

* we downloaded and built UE4...did you?
* we talked about those 'module' thingies.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## pImpl

*Pointer-to-Implementation* is a technique for reducing coupling
between a class (a library) and its clients

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Pros

* Allows the class implementation to change without recompiling the client
* Reducing compilation times by including *expensive* headers only in
a single source file

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---


### Cons

* Prevents function inlining
* Adds an extra redirection for each call


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Resources
* [A Twist on pImpl](http://coherent-labs.com/a-twist-on-pimpl/)
* [A Twist on pImpl Gist](https://gist.github.com/dimitarcl/3771331/)


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Usage of pImpl

Almost every project is divided in sub-projects according to some
principles. For example:
* Implementation: separating platform specific code
* Aspect: logging, profiling
* Functionality: Rendering

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* All UE4 modules contain a *master* class deriving from
[`IModuleInterface`](https://docs.unrealengine.com/latest/INT/API/Runtime/Core/Modules/IModuleInterface/index.html)
* The master class must be called `I[Something]Module`

```cpp
class ISusiModule : public IModuleInterface
{
    public:
    virtual void StartupModule() override;
    virtual void ShutdownModule() override;
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Module implementation is classic PIMPL
  - Public class that derives from `IModuleInterface`
  - Private class that implements the public class

```cpp
// /SusiModule/Public/SusiModule.h
class ISusiModule : public IModuleInterface {
};

// /SusiModule/Private/SusiModule.cpp
class FSusiModule : public ISusiModule {};
IMPLEMENT_MODULE(FSusiModule, Susi)
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Usage of pImpl

*pImpl* can be used to implement the interfaces of the internal
libraries in a project

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

...which let you do fancy stuff such as dynamic reloading!

```cpp
virtual bool SupportsDynamicReloading();
virtual bool SupportsAutomaticShutdown();
```
--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Now what class implements the public interface?

```cpp
IMPLEMENT_MODULE(FPaper2DModule, Paper2D);
// alternatively IMPLEMENT_MODULE(FDefaultGameModuleImpl, Paper2D);
```

* Calling `IMPLEMENT_MODULE` is a requirement!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Technically, there are two types of modules

* Gameplay modules - modules that have game-related code
    * Must use `IMPLEMENT_GAME_MODULE` / `IMPLEMENT_PRIMARY_GAME_MODULE`
* General-purpose modules

```cpp
bool FSusiModule::IsGameModule() const
{
    return false;
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

To make your code available for usage, you need to export it with `MODULE_API`

```cpp
class FKitty
{
    public:
        KITTY_API void Purr();
};
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Module management - `FModuleManager`:

```cpp
bool IsModuleLoaded( const FName InModuleName );

template<typename TModuleInterface>
static TModuleInterface& GetModuleChecked( const FName ModuleName );

template<typename TModuleInterface>
static TModuleInterface* GetModulePtr( const FName ModuleName );

template<typename TModuleInterface>
static TModuleInterface& LoadModuleChecked( const FName ModuleName );

template<typename TModuleInterface>
static TModuleInterface* LoadModulePtr( const FName ModuleName );

bool ModuleExists(const TCHAR* ModuleName);
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### C++ Library distribution

* complete source
  * header only
  * amalgamation
* prebuilt
  * static libraries
  * dynamic libraries

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Complete source

* Open Source?
* Intellectual property?
  * sell services around the library

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:

* The library is always using the same compiler, `std` library and runtime
* Customers can tweak compiler settings, port to another platform

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Cons:

* Support all the possible compilers / IDEs / libraries
    * There are projects using VS 2008, gcc-4.2, etc, ...
    * (Handle mysql.h which does `#define min(a, b) ...`)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Header-only

Just a set of headers

* add the path to the *include paths* of the project
* include a header or two

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:

* Very easy to add to the project

Cons:

* Can have huge impact on compile and link times
* Has to co-exist completely in customer code

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Amalgamation

The entire library in a single source and a single (or couple of) header

* Just add the source file to one of your project files
* Solves the compile and link times issue

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Prebuilt library

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Static library

Pros:

* less overhead for calls
* chance for link-time optimizations

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Cons:

* the library has to use the same compiler/ `std` / runtime as the application
* the library has to be compiled with the same flags as the application
  * debug / release, iterator debug level, optimization options

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Dynamic library

Set of headers and dynamic libraries (and stubs for platforms that need them)

Pros:

* can use different compiler / `std` / runtime than the application
* can use *release* even for *debug*

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Cons:

* *must not* transfer ownership of resources between the library and the app
    * *must not* use `std` types in the interface
* Function calls are indirect

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Why not transfer ownership of resources?

* Most resources are handles to resources in the OS / runtime
  * A valid handle in one runtime is not valid in the other
* The allocator in the library will have different pool than the application.
  Allocators don't know how to free memory allocated from another.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Why not `STL` in the interface?

* One can never know when a `stl` container will allocate / deallocate memory
* STL containers can be different because of compiler versions / flags
  * Visual Studio `vector` in debug stores a list of all of its iterators

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

So, what is a library friendly API?

* Pure C
* C++ interfaces

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Pure C

Pros:

* *works* - it will be hard to find incompatible compilers
* easier to use with other languages

Cons:

* `prefix_everything()` to avoid name clashes
* no overloading

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Hourglass API

```
------ C++ wrapper API
\    /
 \  /
  ||   Pure C API
 /  \
/    \
------ C++ implementation
```

[Slides](http://www.slideshare.net/StefanusDuToit/cpp-con-2014-hourglass-interfaces-for-c-apis)
 & [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PVYdHDm0q6Y)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

#### C ++ interfaces

* C functions for initialization that return a pure C++ interface
* `Destroy` method for the interface ???

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

```cpp
auto library = InitializeLibrary();
delete library; // will free the memory using the wrong allocator
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Unreal Engine 4 Standard Library

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

| std                 | UE4          |
| ------------------- | ------------ |
|`std::vector`        | `TArray`     |
|`std::unordered_map` | `TMap`       |
|`std::unordered_set` | `TSet`       |
|`std::unique_ptr`    | `TUniquePtr` |
|`std::shared_ptr`    | `TSharedPtr` |
|`std::map`           | NA           |
|`std::set`           | NA           |

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## String handling

UE4 uses a *very* complicated system for string management:

* `TCHAR*`
* `FString`
* `FText`
* `FName`

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `TCHAR*`

* Unicode
* Routines for conversion - never store the return values!

```cpp
TCHAR_TO_ANSI(str)
TCHAR_TO_OEM(str)
ANSI_TO_TCHAR(str)
TCHAR_TO_UTF8(str)
UTF8_TO_TCHAR(str)
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `FString`

* Your general string class
* Mutable, unlike many other implementations

```cpp
FString TestHUDString = TestHUDName.ToString();
FString TestHUDString = TestHUDText.ToString();
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `FText`

* Display string, supports localization, use it for every output
* Immutable

```cpp
#define LOCTEXT_NAMESPACE "Your Namespace"
...
FText TestHUDText = LOCTEXT("Your Key", "Your Text");
...
#undef LOCTEXT_NAMESPACE
...
FText TestHUDText = NSLOCTEXT( "Your Namespace", "Your Key", "Your Text" );
...
FText MyText(*MyString);
FText::Format( LOCTEXT( "HelloMessageFormat",  "Hello {0}," ), PlayerName );
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `FName`

* Immutable
* Stored in global string table
* Only 1 copy for equal FNames
* Fast to use as keys

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Delegates

* C++ does not have standard delegates.
* `std::function` is not enough


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

[UE4 Delegates](https://docs.unrealengine.com/latest/INT/Programming/UnrealArchitecture/Delegates/index.html)


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

[UE4 Functions](https://docs.unrealengine.com/latest/INT/Programming/UnrealArchitecture/Reference/Functions/index.html)


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Games and plugins

Plugins are mini-games!

* Content
* Resources
* Code
* The only limitation is that plugins can't depend on other plugins

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Most commercial plugins support other commercial and in-house systems
* These systems are significant IP, so they are not distributted as source (most)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

So most plugins have the following structure:

* a *module* consisting of precompiled dynamic libraries and their headers
  * simply contains the normal C++ API and doesn't have any UE4 related logic
* a *plugin* using the module to make it Unreal Engine aware
  * components, actors, `UObject` integration

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

```cs
using UnrealBuildTool;

public class MyPlugin : ModuleRules
{
    public MyPlugin(TargetInfo Target)
    {
        Type = ModuleType.External;

        string sourceDir = UEBuildConfiguration.UEThirdPartySourceDirectory +
            "MyPlugin/";

        string libDir = sourceDir + "lib/";

        PublicIncludePaths.AddRange(
            new string[] { sourceDir + "include", }
        );

        if (Target.Platform == UnrealTargetPlatform.Win64)
        {
            libDir += "Win64";
            PublicLibraryPaths.Add(libDir);
            PublicAdditionalLibraries.AddRange(
                new string[] { "MyPlugin.lib", }
            );
            PublicDelayLoadDLLs.AddRange(
                new string[] { "MyPlugin.dll", }
            );
        }
        // else all the rest platforms
    }
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

The plugin can be prebuilt or in clear source.

* Prebuilt
  * will need `|UE4 versions| * |platforms| * |configuratons|` versions!

* Clear Source
  * the plugin is a wrapper and should not contain any significant IP
  * with single source, will work for multiple UE4 versions in all
    configurations and all supported platforms
  * customers may look at the code to learn and fix

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### Distributing game

`File -> Package game`

1. Cook the content for the chosen platform
2. Compile the game for the chosen platform
3. *Zip* the folder and profit

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Plugin Distribution

1. Delete *Intermediate*, *Build*, *Binaries* and *Saved*
2. Zip your plugin
3. Unzip your plugin at the destination
4. Enable the plugin
5. ???
6. Profit!

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Unreal Engine 4 build system

* A complete project of its own!
* Check */Engine/Build/BatchFiles*

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### UnrealHeaderTool

* reflection
* code generation
* running as a tool

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### UnrealBuildTool

The pain-in-the-butt wrapper

![Pain in the butt kitty](resources/04.fundamentals_ue4/pain_in_the_butt.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

You never need to call it directly - use your IDE or batch files

```cmd
Engine/Build/BatchFiles/GenerateProjectFiles.bat -Game
Engine/Build/BatchFiles/Rebuild.bat MyProject Win64 Shipping
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### UnrealAutomationTool

- Hides all the details for you

```cmd
..\..\Build\BatchFiles\RunUAT.bat BuildCookRun -project=path\to\project\project.uproject
    -noP4 -platform=Win64 -clientconfig=Development -serverconfig=Development -build
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Any questions?

Commit message:

Reordered review questions so that theory and practice are separated.

lectures/04.fundamentals_ue4.md, after:

# Game Engine Architecture

## UE4 Fundamentals

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the difference between these files?

| File                            | Description                                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| *Source/MyGame.Target.cs*       | <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Sets up the build environment for the *game* 'MyGame'   |
| *Source/MyGame/MyGame.Build.cs* | <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Sets up the build environment for the *module* 'MyGame' |

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

Judging by the names of these classes, what can you tell about them?

| Class               | Info                                                                            |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `FDirectoryWatcher` | <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> A standard C++ class |
| `TFunction`         | <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="1" --> A template class     |

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" --> What other prefixes were there?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What's a unity build?

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Putting all your source files into a single file
and compiling that one megafile, effectively skipping the linker.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

TBD / TODO:
HEAVILY REDUCE THE MODULE TALKING IN HERE / ADD AN EXERCISE ON HOW TO USE CONTAINERS, POINTERS AND LOGGING IN A TRIVIAL GAME
TO GET THEM USED TO THE ENGINE

Last time on...'How I met your ~~mother~~ game engine'

* we downloaded and built UE4...did you?
* we talked about those 'module' thingies.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## pImpl

*Pointer-to-Implementation* is a technique for reducing coupling
between a class (a library) and its clients

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Pros

* Allows the class implementation to change without recompiling the client
* Reducing compilation times by including *expensive* headers only in
a single source file

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---


### Cons

* Prevents function inlining
* Adds an extra redirection for each call


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Resources
* [A Twist on pImpl](http://coherent-labs.com/a-twist-on-pimpl/)
* [A Twist on pImpl Gist](https://gist.github.com/dimitarcl/3771331/)


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Usage of pImpl

Almost every project is divided in sub-projects according to some
principles. For example:
* Implementation: separating platform specific code
* Aspect: logging, profiling
* Functionality: Rendering

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* All UE4 modules contain a *master* class deriving from
[`IModuleInterface`](https://docs.unrealengine.com/latest/INT/API/Runtime/Core/Modules/IModuleInterface/index.html)
* The master class must be called `I[Something]Module`

```cpp
class ISusiModule : public IModuleInterface
{
    public:
    virtual void StartupModule() override;
    virtual void ShutdownModule() override;
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Module implementation is classic PIMPL
  - Public class that derives from `IModuleInterface`
  - Private class that implements the public class

```cpp
// /SusiModule/Public/SusiModule.h
class ISusiModule : public IModuleInterface {
};

// /SusiModule/Private/SusiModule.cpp
class FSusiModule : public ISusiModule {};
IMPLEMENT_MODULE(FSusiModule, Susi)
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Usage of pImpl

*pImpl* can be used to implement the interfaces of the internal
libraries in a project

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

...which let you do fancy stuff such as dynamic reloading!

```cpp
virtual bool SupportsDynamicReloading();
virtual bool SupportsAutomaticShutdown();
```
--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Now what class implements the public interface?

```cpp
IMPLEMENT_MODULE(FPaper2DModule, Paper2D);
// alternatively IMPLEMENT_MODULE(FDefaultGameModuleImpl, Paper2D);
```

* Calling `IMPLEMENT_MODULE` is a requirement!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Technically, there are two types of modules

* Gameplay modules - modules that have game-related code
    * Must use `IMPLEMENT_GAME_MODULE` / `IMPLEMENT_PRIMARY_GAME_MODULE`
* General-purpose modules

```cpp
bool FSusiModule::IsGameModule() const
{
    return false;
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

To make your code available for usage, you need to export it with `MODULE_API`

```cpp
class FKitty
{
    public:
        KITTY_API void Purr();
};
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Module management - `FModuleManager`:

```cpp
bool IsModuleLoaded( const FName InModuleName );

template<typename TModuleInterface>
static TModuleInterface& GetModuleChecked( const FName ModuleName );

template<typename TModuleInterface>
static TModuleInterface* GetModulePtr( const FName ModuleName );

template<typename TModuleInterface>
static TModuleInterface& LoadModuleChecked( const FName ModuleName );

template<typename TModuleInterface>
static TModuleInterface* LoadModulePtr( const FName ModuleName );

bool ModuleExists(const TCHAR* ModuleName);
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### C++ Library distribution

* complete source
  * header only
  * amalgamation
* prebuilt
  * static libraries
  * dynamic libraries

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Complete source

* Open Source?
* Intellectual property?
  * sell services around the library

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:

* The library is always using the same compiler, `std` library and runtime
* Customers can tweak compiler settings, port to another platform

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Cons:

* Support all the possible compilers / IDEs / libraries
    * There are projects using VS 2008, gcc-4.2, etc, ...
    * (Handle mysql.h which does `#define min(a, b) ...`)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Header-only

Just a set of headers

* add the path to the *include paths* of the project
* include a header or two

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:

* Very easy to add to the project

Cons:

* Can have huge impact on compile and link times
* Has to co-exist completely in customer code

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Amalgamation

The entire library in a single source and a single (or couple of) header

* Just add the source file to one of your project files
* Solves the compile and link times issue

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Prebuilt library

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Static library

Pros:

* less overhead for calls
* chance for link-time optimizations

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Cons:

* the library has to use the same compiler/ `std` / runtime as the application
* the library has to be compiled with the same flags as the application
  * debug / release, iterator debug level, optimization options

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Dynamic library

Set of headers and dynamic libraries (and stubs for platforms that need them)

Pros:

* can use different compiler / `std` / runtime than the application
* can use *release* even for *debug*

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Cons:

* *must not* transfer ownership of resources between the library and the app
    * *must not* use `std` types in the interface
* Function calls are indirect

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Why not transfer ownership of resources?

* Most resources are handles to resources in the OS / runtime
  * A valid handle in one runtime is not valid in the other
* The allocator in the library will have different pool than the application.
  Allocators don't know how to free memory allocated from another.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Why not `STL` in the interface?

* One can never know when a `stl` container will allocate / deallocate memory
* STL containers can be different because of compiler versions / flags
  * Visual Studio `vector` in debug stores a list of all of its iterators

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

So, what is a library friendly API?

* Pure C
* C++ interfaces

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Pure C

Pros:

* *works* - it will be hard to find incompatible compilers
* easier to use with other languages

Cons:

* `prefix_everything()` to avoid name clashes
* no overloading

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

###### Hourglass API

```
------ C++ wrapper API
\    /
 \  /
  ||   Pure C API
 /  \
/    \
------ C++ implementation
```

[Slides](http://www.slideshare.net/StefanusDuToit/cpp-con-2014-hourglass-interfaces-for-c-apis)
 & [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PVYdHDm0q6Y)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

#### C ++ interfaces

* C functions for initialization that return a pure C++ interface
* `Destroy` method for the interface ???

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

```cpp
auto library = InitializeLibrary();
delete library; // will free the memory using the wrong allocator
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Unreal Engine 4 Standard Library

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

| std                 | UE4          |
| ------------------- | ------------ |
|`std::vector`        | `TArray`     |
|`std::unordered_map` | `TMap`       |
|`std::unordered_set` | `TSet`       |
|`std::unique_ptr`    | `TUniquePtr` |
|`std::shared_ptr`    | `TSharedPtr` |
|`std::map`           | NA           |
|`std::set`           | NA           |

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## String handling

UE4 uses a *very* complicated system for string management:

* `TCHAR*`
* `FString`
* `FText`
* `FName`

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `TCHAR*`

* Unicode
* Routines for conversion - never store the return values!

```cpp
TCHAR_TO_ANSI(str)
TCHAR_TO_OEM(str)
ANSI_TO_TCHAR(str)
TCHAR_TO_UTF8(str)
UTF8_TO_TCHAR(str)
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `FString`

* Your general string class
* Mutable, unlike many other implementations

```cpp
FString TestHUDString = TestHUDName.ToString();
FString TestHUDString = TestHUDText.ToString();
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `FText`

* Display string, supports localization, use it for every output
* Immutable

```cpp
#define LOCTEXT_NAMESPACE "Your Namespace"
...
FText TestHUDText = LOCTEXT("Your Key", "Your Text");
...
#undef LOCTEXT_NAMESPACE
...
FText TestHUDText = NSLOCTEXT( "Your Namespace", "Your Key", "Your Text" );
...
FText MyText(*MyString);
FText::Format( LOCTEXT( "HelloMessageFormat",  "Hello {0}," ), PlayerName );
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `FName`

* Immutable
* Stored in global string table
* Only 1 copy for equal FNames
* Fast to use as keys

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Delegates

* C++ does not have standard delegates.
* `std::function` is not enough


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

[UE4 Delegates](https://docs.unrealengine.com/latest/INT/Programming/UnrealArchitecture/Delegates/index.html)


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

[UE4 Functions](https://docs.unrealengine.com/latest/INT/Programming/UnrealArchitecture/Reference/Functions/index.html)


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Games and plugins

Plugins are mini-games!

* Content
* Resources
* Code
* The only limitation is that plugins can't depend on other plugins

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Most commercial plugins support other commercial and in-house systems
* These systems are significant IP, so they are not distributted as source (most)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

So most plugins have the following structure:

* a *module* consisting of precompiled dynamic libraries and their headers
  * simply contains the normal C++ API and doesn't have any UE4 related logic
* a *plugin* using the module to make it Unreal Engine aware
  * components, actors, `UObject` integration

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

```cs
using UnrealBuildTool;

public class MyPlugin : ModuleRules
{
    public MyPlugin(TargetInfo Target)
    {
        Type = ModuleType.External;

        string sourceDir = UEBuildConfiguration.UEThirdPartySourceDirectory +
            "MyPlugin/";

        string libDir = sourceDir + "lib/";

        PublicIncludePaths.AddRange(
            new string[] { sourceDir + "include", }
        );

        if (Target.Platform == UnrealTargetPlatform.Win64)
        {
            libDir += "Win64";
            PublicLibraryPaths.Add(libDir);
            PublicAdditionalLibraries.AddRange(
                new string[] { "MyPlugin.lib", }
            );
            PublicDelayLoadDLLs.AddRange(
                new string[] { "MyPlugin.dll", }
            );
        }
        // else all the rest platforms
    }
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

The plugin can be prebuilt or in clear source.

* Prebuilt
  * will need `|UE4 versions| * |platforms| * |configuratons|` versions!

* Clear Source
  * the plugin is a wrapper and should not contain any significant IP
  * with single source, will work for multiple UE4 versions in all
    configurations and all supported platforms
  * customers may look at the code to learn and fix

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### Distributing game

`File -> Package game`

1. Cook the content for the chosen platform
2. Compile the game for the chosen platform
3. *Zip* the folder and profit

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Plugin Distribution

1. Delete *Intermediate*, *Build*, *Binaries* and *Saved*
2. Zip your plugin
3. Unzip your plugin at the destination
4. Enable the plugin
5. ???
6. Profit!

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Unreal Engine 4 build system

* A complete project of its own!
* Check */Engine/Build/BatchFiles*

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### UnrealHeaderTool

* reflection
* code generation
* running as a tool

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### UnrealBuildTool

The pain-in-the-butt wrapper

![Pain in the butt kitty](resources/04.fundamentals_ue4/pain_in_the_butt.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

You never need to call it directly - use your IDE or batch files

```cmd
Engine/Build/BatchFiles/GenerateProjectFiles.bat -Game
Engine/Build/BatchFiles/Rebuild.bat MyProject Win64 Shipping
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### UnrealAutomationTool

- Hides all the details for you

```cmd
..\..\Build\BatchFiles\RunUAT.bat BuildCookRun -project=path\to\project\project.uproject
    -noP4 -platform=Win64 -clientconfig=Development -serverconfig=Development -build
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Any questions?
