lectures/09.rendering_1.md, before:

# Game Engine Architecture

## Rendering

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the difference between these two lines?

```cpp
FModuleManager::UnloadModule(TEXT("Susi"));
FModuleManager::AbandonModule(TEXT("Susi"));
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What do these things do `FMemory, FMalloc, FPlatformMemory`?

* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> `FMemory` is a high-level class for doing memory stuff
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> `FMalloc` is an interface for UE4's multiple general-purpose allocators
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> `FPlatformMemory` selects what should the global allocator be and has some memory stats

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the final value of these config settings?

```
[/Script/Engine.PlayerInput]
Bindings=(Name="1",Command="EquipKnife")
.Bindings=(Name="1",Command="EquipSMG")
.Bindings=(Name="1",Command="EquipKnife")

[Internationalization]
+LocalizationPaths=../../../Engine/Content/Localization/Editor
+LocalizationPaths=../../../Engine/Content/Localization/EditorTutorials
+LocalizationPaths=../../../Engine/Content/Localization/Keywords
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Disclaimer

The following material should be covered by a complete course (at least one)
of its own.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Rendering algorithms

How do you a draw 3D cats on a 2D screen?

![French kitty](resources/09.rendering/french_kitten.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Ray tracing

![Ray tracing](resources/09.rendering/ray_trace_diagram.svg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Raytracing looks awesome! [Chaos Group](http://www.chaosgroup.com/en/2/index.html)
made a bussiness out of solving ray-tracing.

* [But it's reaaaaaaaaaaaly slow - 100+ rays for each pixel](http://www.longtail.com/the_long_tail/2006/12/pixar_quiz.html)
* So it mostly works on prerendered scenes (though it can be made to work for some cases)

Enter rasterization!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Painter's algorithm

![Ray tracing](resources/09.rendering/painters_algorithm.svg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Z-Buffer

![Ray tracing](resources/09.rendering/z_buffer.svg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Scan-line

![Ray tracing](resources/09.rendering/scanline.svg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Rendering a scene

* *virtual scene*
* *virtual camera*
* *light sources*
* *visual properties*

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Scene](resources/09.rendering/scene.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Styles

* photorealistic
* cartoon
* charcoal sketch
* watercolor
* wool

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## A scene

- set of objects
  - opaque
  - transparent
  - translucent


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Representations of objects

* equations
* NURBS
* subdivision
* triangle meshes

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Triangles

The triangle is the simplest type of polygon. Any fewer than three vertices,
and we wouldn’t have a surface at all.

- A triangle is always planar.
- Triangles remain triangles under most kinds of transformations, including
  affine transforms and perspective projections.
- Virtually all commercial graphics-acceleration hardware is designed around
  triangle rasterization.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Tessellation

Triangulation

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Torus triangulations](resources/09.rendering/triangulation.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Constructing a triangle mesh

- Winding
- Triangle list
- indexed triangle list
- triangle strip
- triangle fan

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Vertex cache optimization

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

- Model space
- World space and mesh instancing
  - buildings directly in world space (precision...)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Surface properties

- diffuse color
- shininess / reflectivity
- roughness
- texture
- opacity
- refraction

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Vertex attributes

- position vector
- vertex normal
- vertex tangent
- diffuse color
- specular color
- texture coordinates
- skinning weights


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Attribute interpolation

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Interpolation](resources/09.rendering/interpolation.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Interpolation](resources/09.rendering/normals.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Attribute interpolation is not enough

![Sphere](resources/09.rendering/sphere.jpg)


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Textures

- diffuse albedo
- texture coordinates
- texture addressing


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Texture mapping](resources/09.rendering/texture.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Texture addressing](resources/09.rendering/texture_addressing.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- miplevel
- world-space texel density
- texture filtering
  - nearest neighbor
  - bilinear
  - trilinear
  - anisotropic

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Lighting

- local and global illumination

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Rendering Equation

![Equation](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/a495d583fc720dac498e081e3da6bf89a2dad636)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Phong Lighting model

![Phong](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6b/Phong_components_version_4.png/655px-Phong_components_version_4.png)

- Blinn-Phong


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Physically Based Rendering

![PBR](http://www.meta3dstudios.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/PBR-Example-e1440106098549.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

 BRDF

![BRDF](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ed/BRDF_Diagram.svg/300px-BRDF_Diagram.svg.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- static lighting
- ambient lights
- directional lights
- point lights
- spot lights
- area lights
- emissive

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Gamma correction
* SRGB
* HDR

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Materials

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Virtual Camera

- Frustrum

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Frustrum](resources/09.rendering/frustrum.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Projections
  - Perspective projection

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Projections](resources/09.rendering/projections.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Screen space
- Framebuffer

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Rasterization

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Rasterization](resources/09.rendering/rasterization.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Z-Buffer

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![z-fighting](resources/09.rendering/zfighting.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

W-Buffering

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Rendering Pipeline

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Tools stage (offline). Geometry and surface properties (materials) are defined.
- Asset conditioning stage (offline). The geometry and material data are processed
by the asset conditioning pipeline (ACP) into an engine-ready
format.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Application stage (CPU). Potentially visible mesh instances are identified
and submitted to the graphics hardware along with their materials for
rendering.
- Geometry processing stage (GPU). Vertices are transformed and lit and projected
into homogeneous clip space. Triangles are processed by the optional
geometry shader and then clipped to the frustum.
- Rasterization stage (GPU). Triangles are converted into fragments that are
shaded, passed through various tests (z-test, alpha test, stencil test, etc.)
and finally blended into the frame buffer.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Pipeline](resources/09.rendering/pipeline.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## GPU pipeline

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![GPU Pipeline](https://traxnet.files.wordpress.com/2011/07/shader_full.jpeg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Anti-Aliasing

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![AA](https://qph.ec.quoracdn.net/main-qimg-10856ecbea4f439fb9fb751d41ff704a)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- MSAA
- FXAA
- TXAA
- Others

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![AA Comp](http://techreport.com/r.x/gtx-680-followup/txaa-comparo.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Scene graphs

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Visibility detection

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Scene partition](resources/09.rendering/scenepartition.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Particles

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Particles](https://cdn1.epicgames.com/ue/item/PyroParticlePack_Screenshot_03-1920x1080-f6d2780cea1164a79dfebf6f01d87795.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Post Processing

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* HDR
* Bloom
* Motion Blur
* Tone Mapping
* Lens Flare
* Ambient Occlusion

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![LensFlare](http://www.adriancourreges.com/img/blog/2015/gtav/c/01_lf.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![MotionBlur](http://i.imgur.com/J9zopPz.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Forward Rendering and Deferred Rendering

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Forward Rendering

![Forward Rendering](https://cdn.tutsplus.com/gamedev/uploads/2013/11/forward-v2.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Deffered Rendering

![Forward Rendering](https://cdn.tutsplus.com/gamedev/uploads/2013/11/deferred-v2.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

G-Buffer

![GBuffer](http://ogldev.atspace.co.uk/www/tutorial35/gbuffer.jpg)


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Implementation details

- single-threaded
- multi-threaded
- task based

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Async Compute

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Mobile GPU

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Tiled deferred renderer

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Modern API

- Dx12
- Vulkan
- Metal

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Explicit Memory Allocation
- Explicit Resource Binding
- Explicit Synchronizations

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Driver](https://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/Screen-Shot-2015-08-10-at-11.10.00-AM-640x367.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## GPU Debugging

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Every vendor has custom tools

- NVidia NSight
- AMD Perf Studio
- PIX
- Renderdoc

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![renderdoc](https://www.cryengine.com/assets/images/showcase/fullsize/renderdoc1.png)

Commit message:

Reordered review questions so that theory and practice are separated.

lectures/09.rendering_1.md, after:

# Game Engine Architecture

## Rendering

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

What are the pros and cons of these:

* Euler angles
* Axis + angle
* Rotation matrices
* Quaternions

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

How do you convert homogenous to heterogenous coordinates?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Disclaimer

The following material should be covered by a complete course (at least one)
of its own.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Rendering algorithms

How do you a draw 3D cats on a 2D screen?

![French kitty](resources/09.rendering/french_kitten.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Ray tracing

![Ray tracing](resources/09.rendering/ray_trace_diagram.svg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Raytracing looks awesome! [Chaos Group](http://www.chaosgroup.com/en/2/index.html)
made a bussiness out of solving ray-tracing.

* [But it's reaaaaaaaaaaaly slow - 100+ rays for each pixel](http://www.longtail.com/the_long_tail/2006/12/pixar_quiz.html)
* So it mostly works on prerendered scenes (though it can be made to work for some cases)

Enter rasterization!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Painter's algorithm

![Ray tracing](resources/09.rendering/painters_algorithm.svg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Z-Buffer

![Ray tracing](resources/09.rendering/z_buffer.svg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Scan-line

![Ray tracing](resources/09.rendering/scanline.svg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Rendering a scene

* *virtual scene*
* *virtual camera*
* *light sources*
* *visual properties*

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Scene](resources/09.rendering/scene.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Styles

* photorealistic
* cartoon
* charcoal sketch
* watercolor
* wool

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## A scene

- set of objects
  - opaque
  - transparent
  - translucent


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Representations of objects

* equations
* NURBS
* subdivision
* triangle meshes

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Triangles

The triangle is the simplest type of polygon. Any fewer than three vertices,
and we wouldn’t have a surface at all.

- A triangle is always planar.
- Triangles remain triangles under most kinds of transformations, including
  affine transforms and perspective projections.
- Virtually all commercial graphics-acceleration hardware is designed around
  triangle rasterization.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Tessellation

Triangulation

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Torus triangulations](resources/09.rendering/triangulation.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Constructing a triangle mesh

- Winding
- Triangle list
- indexed triangle list
- triangle strip
- triangle fan

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Vertex cache optimization

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

- Model space
- World space and mesh instancing
  - buildings directly in world space (precision...)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Surface properties

- diffuse color
- shininess / reflectivity
- roughness
- texture
- opacity
- refraction

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Vertex attributes

- position vector
- vertex normal
- vertex tangent
- diffuse color
- specular color
- texture coordinates
- skinning weights


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Attribute interpolation

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Interpolation](resources/09.rendering/interpolation.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Interpolation](resources/09.rendering/normals.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Attribute interpolation is not enough

![Sphere](resources/09.rendering/sphere.jpg)


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Textures

- diffuse albedo
- texture coordinates
- texture addressing


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Texture mapping](resources/09.rendering/texture.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Texture addressing](resources/09.rendering/texture_addressing.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- miplevel
- world-space texel density
- texture filtering
  - nearest neighbor
  - bilinear
  - trilinear
  - anisotropic

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Lighting

- local and global illumination

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Rendering Equation

![Equation](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/a495d583fc720dac498e081e3da6bf89a2dad636)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Phong Lighting model

![Phong](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6b/Phong_components_version_4.png/655px-Phong_components_version_4.png)

- Blinn-Phong


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Physically Based Rendering

![PBR](http://www.meta3dstudios.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/PBR-Example-e1440106098549.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

 BRDF

![BRDF](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ed/BRDF_Diagram.svg/300px-BRDF_Diagram.svg.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- static lighting
- ambient lights
- directional lights
- point lights
- spot lights
- area lights
- emissive

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Gamma correction
* SRGB
* HDR

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Materials

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Virtual Camera

- Frustrum

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Frustrum](resources/09.rendering/frustrum.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Projections
  - Perspective projection

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Projections](resources/09.rendering/projections.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Screen space
- Framebuffer

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Rasterization

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Rasterization](resources/09.rendering/rasterization.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Z-Buffer

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![z-fighting](resources/09.rendering/zfighting.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

W-Buffering

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Rendering Pipeline

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Tools stage (offline). Geometry and surface properties (materials) are defined.
- Asset conditioning stage (offline). The geometry and material data are processed
by the asset conditioning pipeline (ACP) into an engine-ready
format.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Application stage (CPU). Potentially visible mesh instances are identified
and submitted to the graphics hardware along with their materials for
rendering.
- Geometry processing stage (GPU). Vertices are transformed and lit and projected
into homogeneous clip space. Triangles are processed by the optional
geometry shader and then clipped to the frustum.
- Rasterization stage (GPU). Triangles are converted into fragments that are
shaded, passed through various tests (z-test, alpha test, stencil test, etc.)
and finally blended into the frame buffer.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Pipeline](resources/09.rendering/pipeline.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## GPU pipeline

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![GPU Pipeline](https://traxnet.files.wordpress.com/2011/07/shader_full.jpeg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Anti-Aliasing

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![AA](https://qph.ec.quoracdn.net/main-qimg-10856ecbea4f439fb9fb751d41ff704a)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- MSAA
- FXAA
- TXAA
- Others

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![AA Comp](http://techreport.com/r.x/gtx-680-followup/txaa-comparo.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Scene graphs

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Visibility detection

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Scene partition](resources/09.rendering/scenepartition.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Particles

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Particles](https://cdn1.epicgames.com/ue/item/PyroParticlePack_Screenshot_03-1920x1080-f6d2780cea1164a79dfebf6f01d87795.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Post Processing

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* HDR
* Bloom
* Motion Blur
* Tone Mapping
* Lens Flare
* Ambient Occlusion

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![LensFlare](http://www.adriancourreges.com/img/blog/2015/gtav/c/01_lf.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![MotionBlur](http://i.imgur.com/J9zopPz.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Forward Rendering and Deferred Rendering

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Forward Rendering

![Forward Rendering](https://cdn.tutsplus.com/gamedev/uploads/2013/11/forward-v2.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Deffered Rendering

![Forward Rendering](https://cdn.tutsplus.com/gamedev/uploads/2013/11/deferred-v2.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

G-Buffer

![GBuffer](http://ogldev.atspace.co.uk/www/tutorial35/gbuffer.jpg)


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Implementation details

- single-threaded
- multi-threaded
- task based

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Async Compute

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Mobile GPU

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Tiled deferred renderer

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Modern API

- Dx12
- Vulkan
- Metal

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Explicit Memory Allocation
- Explicit Resource Binding
- Explicit Synchronizations

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![Driver](https://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/Screen-Shot-2015-08-10-at-11.10.00-AM-640x367.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## GPU Debugging

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Every vendor has custom tools

- NVidia NSight
- AMD Perf Studio
- PIX
- Renderdoc

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

![renderdoc](https://www.cryengine.com/assets/images/showcase/fullsize/renderdoc1.png)
