lectures/13.ui.md, before:

# Game Engine Architecture

## User interface

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the special about the animation blueprints?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What's root motion?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Contents

- User interface
  - implementations
      - modes
      - creation workflow
      - scripting
  - Fonts
  - L10n
  - FX
  - UX
  - Future
- User interaction

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## User Interface

Everything in the game that allows the user to interact with the game or shows
information about the state of the game that is relevant to the player.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### User Interface

- menus
- chats
- option screens
- help messages
- player health, score, speed of movement
- direction pointers
- quest pointers

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Logic in the UI

- there are some features that can be implemented (almost) entirely in the UI of
  the game
  - chat
  - patch notes
  - parties, guilds, etc
  - inventory operations like stacking and splitting

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Challenges for the User interface

- logic
- animation
- l10n
- scalability
  - 800x600 to 4K
  - 4:3 to 12:3
- automatic layout
- fonts
- mods

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Generally all of these are rendered as overlay on the game

- 2D or 3D image
- without depth testing, so it's always above the game world

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### How is the UI created?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- For very small or simple games, the UI can be created by the programmer
- The artists use Photoshop and Illustrator to create the UI as they image it
  - But what is next?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

#### Immediate mode UI

http://mollyrocket.com/861

The idea of immediate mode UI is:

- state in the UI and MV** are bloated and hard
- the state is already in the game, just draw it every frame

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Implementation

Each frame call a special method
- on each component (only UI components)
- Each component draws what it wants to the screen

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Animations in the UI

Run an animation in the engine and use the animated variables manually.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Implementations

- https://github.com/ocornut/imgui
- https://github.com/memononen/nanovg

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:
- simple to get started

Cons:
- Need a developer for everything
- hard to optimize
  - redraw everything everyframe
  - have a complex system that detects changes and renders only the different
    parts

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Workflow

1. The developer cuts the image into pieces and makes the engine draw each image
  at the appropriate places
  - attaches click handlers to every button
2. The next day the artists see the UI in the game and change what they do not
  like
3. Goto 1 until done

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Unity3D is/was the only engine with immediade mode UI
- The editor still uses immediate mode
- the modern Unity3D UI is created in the 3D editor, just using orthographic
  projection

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Challenges?

- no mods
- everything is manual

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Retained mode

- The UI has a state of its own
  - not everything has to be duplicated
- The game updates the state of the UI
  - "Player health is now 10"
- The UI can affect the state of the game
  - "Restart the level"

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Retained mode
- Allows for clear separation of the game and UI logic
- The artists, game developers and UI developers agree on sets of:
  - data - player score, health etc
  - events
    - notifications from the game to the UI
    - notifications from the UI fo the game

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Retained mode is actually how user interface is working in any application.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

MVC

![MVC](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a0/MVC-Process.svg)


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

MVVM

![MVVM](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/87/MVVMPattern.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

MVP

![MVP](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/dc/Model_View_Presenter_GUI_Design_Pattern.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Flux

![Flux](https://facebook.github.io/flux/img/flux-simple-f8-diagram-explained-1300w.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### Implementations

- C++
- Scripted
- Flash
- HTML

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### C++ User Interface

- good enough to get the game up and running
- allow some data-driven approach later
  - http://www.fltk.org/doc-1.3/fluid.html - generates C++ classes for the UI
  - a Photoshop plugin that allows the artists to define the borders and meta
    data for pieces of the UI, saves this to JSON and the C++ shows the UI
- might have to recompile the game, just to change the color of a button
- hard for l10n

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### Scripted User Interface

- Expose the C++ drawing API to Lua, python, JavaScript, etc.
- Expose the game state and events to the scropting language
- The UI can have logic of its own
- Allows user mods
- Still can benefit from data-driven approach

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### Implementations
- The most popular combinations
  - Pure Lua
  - XML + Lua
  - XML + JavaScript

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Exposing the game API to the UI
  - can use the existing C++ reflection system and scripting for the gameplay
  - keep the UI scripts signed otherwise someone will cheat
  - user mods can be run in a special isolated environment to prevent cheats and
    allow for security

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### Flash

- Own IDE and content format
  - created for 2D content
- One step further in the decomposing the UI system in the game engine
  - own rendering subsystem geared towards 2D graphics
  - own scripting language and VM - ActionScript

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Implementations

- Scaleform by Autodesk
- Iggy by RAD Game tools
- Internal in several studios

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Integration

```
// ...
InitializeUISubsystem();
while (1) {
    // ...
    UpdateUI(now);
    DrawUI();
}
UnitializeUISubsystem();
// ...
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Workflow

- Artists create concepts in Photoshop
- cut and import them in Flash Studio
- iterate on the content in Flash Studio
- programmers need to expose the proper API to the ActionScript VM

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:
- decouples the UI from the rest of the engine
- allows artists to create UI independently from game developers

Cons:
- Flash is going away
- tied to proprietary formats and tools
- Scalability and automatic layout are still a problem

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### HTML

- widespread, open and standartized languages
- naturally separates UI logic from UI styles
- l10n
- automatic layout

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:
- HTML is here to stay and is picking up
- lots of tools, libraries, etc

Cons:
- the freedom in choices can be overwhelming

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### Others

- WPF - xaml
- xul (used for Firefox)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Fonts

Text rendering is essential for any UI

Fonts can be:
- raster - each glyph is just a 2D image and the font contains the images for a
  certain number of sizes and styles
- vector - each glyph is a collection of primitives
  - for TrueType fonts - straight line segments and quadratic Bezier curves
  - the font can contain a single definition for each symbol, it is scaled by
    the software for the appropriate size and style

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

When a text with raster font is rendered on the screen, the text is rasterized
in a texture and the texture is rendered.

- can use a lot of video memory
  - texture compression will make the font look bad
- can use a lot of CPU for the rasterization

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

With raster fonts, we can use a single texture for the font size and style and
draw each letter directly with the appropriate texture coordinates.

- large vertex and index buffers
- not scallable when there are a lot of different font sizes and styles and
  symbols
  - Players can not have № in their name
- l10n - we might need a texture with almost every unicode symbol possible

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

With vector fonts, we have to create a raster image of the glyph before we can
draw it

- single font for all sizes and styles - can contain more symbols
- rasterization is not trivial
- anti-aliasing

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

http://www.slideshare.net/Mark_Kilgard/23typography-12534604

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Pre-rasterize the font
http://www.angelcode.com/products/bmfont/
- Signed Distance Field - SDF

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### SDF

Signed Distance fields store the distance to the nearest non-black pixel in the
bitmap image
- instead of the intensity at the pixel

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Pre-rasterize the font at huge size - 4096x4096
- From the bitmap compute the distance field and store it in 8 bit texture
- For each texel in the output, determine whether the orignating pixel in the
  image is *in* or *out* and the distance in texels to the neareast texel of the
  opposite kind
- map the output in 0 - inside, 1 - outside, 0.5 - exactly the border of the
  letters
- much better works with the linear interpolation in the GPU
- loss of sharpness

http://www.valvesoftware.com/publications/2007/SIGGRAPH2007_AlphaTestedMagnification.pdf

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/libgdx/libgdx/images/distance-field-fonts.png

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

https://github.com/ds-hwang/wiki/wiki/GPU-Font-Rendering

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Questions?

Commit message:

Fixed inverted review questions in the UI lectures.

lectures/13.ui.md, after:

# Game Engine Architecture

## User interface

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the difference between the rigid body hierarchy and
the skinned animation models?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What's an animation pose and what's an animation clip?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What does IK stand for?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Contents

- User interface
  - implementations
      - modes
      - creation workflow
      - scripting
  - Fonts
  - L10n
  - FX
  - UX
  - Future
- User interaction

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## User Interface

Everything in the game that allows the user to interact with the game or shows
information about the state of the game that is relevant to the player.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### User Interface

- menus
- chats
- option screens
- help messages
- player health, score, speed of movement
- direction pointers
- quest pointers

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Logic in the UI

- there are some features that can be implemented (almost) entirely in the UI of
  the game
  - chat
  - patch notes
  - parties, guilds, etc
  - inventory operations like stacking and splitting

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Challenges for the User interface

- logic
- animation
- l10n
- scalability
  - 800x600 to 4K
  - 4:3 to 12:3
- automatic layout
- fonts
- mods

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Generally all of these are rendered as overlay on the game

- 2D or 3D image
- without depth testing, so it's always above the game world

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### How is the UI created?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- For very small or simple games, the UI can be created by the programmer
- The artists use Photoshop and Illustrator to create the UI as they image it
  - But what is next?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

#### Immediate mode UI

http://mollyrocket.com/861

The idea of immediate mode UI is:

- state in the UI and MV** are bloated and hard
- the state is already in the game, just draw it every frame

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Implementation

Each frame call a special method
- on each component (only UI components)
- Each component draws what it wants to the screen

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Animations in the UI

Run an animation in the engine and use the animated variables manually.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Implementations

- https://github.com/ocornut/imgui
- https://github.com/memononen/nanovg

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:
- simple to get started

Cons:
- Need a developer for everything
- hard to optimize
  - redraw everything everyframe
  - have a complex system that detects changes and renders only the different
    parts

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Workflow

1. The developer cuts the image into pieces and makes the engine draw each image
  at the appropriate places
  - attaches click handlers to every button
2. The next day the artists see the UI in the game and change what they do not
  like
3. Goto 1 until done

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Unity3D is/was the only engine with immediade mode UI
- The editor still uses immediate mode
- the modern Unity3D UI is created in the 3D editor, just using orthographic
  projection

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Challenges?

- no mods
- everything is manual

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Retained mode

- The UI has a state of its own
  - not everything has to be duplicated
- The game updates the state of the UI
  - "Player health is now 10"
- The UI can affect the state of the game
  - "Restart the level"

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Retained mode
- Allows for clear separation of the game and UI logic
- The artists, game developers and UI developers agree on sets of:
  - data - player score, health etc
  - events
    - notifications from the game to the UI
    - notifications from the UI fo the game

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Retained mode is actually how user interface is working in any application.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

MVC

![MVC](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a0/MVC-Process.svg)


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

MVVM

![MVVM](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/87/MVVMPattern.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

MVP

![MVP](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/dc/Model_View_Presenter_GUI_Design_Pattern.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Flux

![Flux](https://facebook.github.io/flux/img/flux-simple-f8-diagram-explained-1300w.png)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### Implementations

- C++
- Scripted
- Flash
- HTML

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### C++ User Interface

- good enough to get the game up and running
- allow some data-driven approach later
  - http://www.fltk.org/doc-1.3/fluid.html - generates C++ classes for the UI
  - a Photoshop plugin that allows the artists to define the borders and meta
    data for pieces of the UI, saves this to JSON and the C++ shows the UI
- might have to recompile the game, just to change the color of a button
- hard for l10n

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### Scripted User Interface

- Expose the C++ drawing API to Lua, python, JavaScript, etc.
- Expose the game state and events to the scropting language
- The UI can have logic of its own
- Allows user mods
- Still can benefit from data-driven approach

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### Implementations
- The most popular combinations
  - Pure Lua
  - XML + Lua
  - XML + JavaScript

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Exposing the game API to the UI
  - can use the existing C++ reflection system and scripting for the gameplay
  - keep the UI scripts signed otherwise someone will cheat
  - user mods can be run in a special isolated environment to prevent cheats and
    allow for security

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### Flash

- Own IDE and content format
  - created for 2D content
- One step further in the decomposing the UI system in the game engine
  - own rendering subsystem geared towards 2D graphics
  - own scripting language and VM - ActionScript

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Implementations

- Scaleform by Autodesk
- Iggy by RAD Game tools
- Internal in several studios

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Integration

```
// ...
InitializeUISubsystem();
while (1) {
    // ...
    UpdateUI(now);
    DrawUI();
}
UnitializeUISubsystem();
// ...
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

##### Workflow

- Artists create concepts in Photoshop
- cut and import them in Flash Studio
- iterate on the content in Flash Studio
- programmers need to expose the proper API to the ActionScript VM

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:
- decouples the UI from the rest of the engine
- allows artists to create UI independently from game developers

Cons:
- Flash is going away
- tied to proprietary formats and tools
- Scalability and automatic layout are still a problem

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### HTML

- widespread, open and standartized languages
- naturally separates UI logic from UI styles
- l10n
- automatic layout

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Pros:
- HTML is here to stay and is picking up
- lots of tools, libraries, etc

Cons:
- the freedom in choices can be overwhelming

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

##### Others

- WPF - xaml
- xul (used for Firefox)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

### Fonts

Text rendering is essential for any UI

Fonts can be:
- raster - each glyph is just a 2D image and the font contains the images for a
  certain number of sizes and styles
- vector - each glyph is a collection of primitives
  - for TrueType fonts - straight line segments and quadratic Bezier curves
  - the font can contain a single definition for each symbol, it is scaled by
    the software for the appropriate size and style

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

When a text with raster font is rendered on the screen, the text is rasterized
in a texture and the texture is rendered.

- can use a lot of video memory
  - texture compression will make the font look bad
- can use a lot of CPU for the rasterization

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

With raster fonts, we can use a single texture for the font size and style and
draw each letter directly with the appropriate texture coordinates.

- large vertex and index buffers
- not scallable when there are a lot of different font sizes and styles and
  symbols
  - Players can not have № in their name
- l10n - we might need a texture with almost every unicode symbol possible

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

With vector fonts, we have to create a raster image of the glyph before we can
draw it

- single font for all sizes and styles - can contain more symbols
- rasterization is not trivial
- anti-aliasing

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

http://www.slideshare.net/Mark_Kilgard/23typography-12534604

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Pre-rasterize the font
http://www.angelcode.com/products/bmfont/
- Signed Distance Field - SDF

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### SDF

Signed Distance fields store the distance to the nearest non-black pixel in the
bitmap image
- instead of the intensity at the pixel

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

- Pre-rasterize the font at huge size - 4096x4096
- From the bitmap compute the distance field and store it in 8 bit texture
- For each texel in the output, determine whether the orignating pixel in the
  image is *in* or *out* and the distance in texels to the neareast texel of the
  opposite kind
- map the output in 0 - inside, 1 - outside, 0.5 - exactly the border of the
  letters
- much better works with the linear interpolation in the GPU
- loss of sharpness

http://www.valvesoftware.com/publications/2007/SIGGRAPH2007_AlphaTestedMagnification.pdf

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/libgdx/libgdx/images/distance-field-fonts.png

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

https://github.com/ds-hwang/wiki/wiki/GPU-Font-Rendering

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Questions?
