lectures/14.ui_ue4.md, before:

# Game Engine Architecture

## User interface in UE4

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the difference between the rigid body hierarchy and
the skinned animation models?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What's an animation pose and what's an animation clip?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What does IK stand for?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Contents

- Slate
- UMG
- BLUI
- Coherent GT

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

UE4 currently has two UI systems

- Slate - low-level, C++ driven
- UMG - high-level, WYSIWYG, uses Slate under the hood, came in 4.6

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Slate

* Custom, platform-agnostic
* Used throughout the entire engine
* Declarative syntax (albeit C++)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

> with the ability to easily design, layout, and style
> components that allows for easily creating and iterating on UIs.

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> ![Sealiest thing](resources/14.ui_ue4/sealiest_thing_meme.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

#### ./hatermode --on Slate

* Slate is a one big exception
* Full of macro-magic
* Things don't work as you expect them to more often than not.
    - Like the HTML5 standard but 100 times worse.
* Animations are super easy - just some C++! Super-artisty!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

#### It's declarative!

`SSusiLoginScreep::ConstructInitialLoginScreen`

Vs.

```
<style>
    form {
        background-color: gray;
        border: 1px solid gray;
    }
    * {
        color: red;
        font: 20px Verdana;
    }
</style>
<form>
    <label>Enter your credentials</label>
    </br>
    <label>Username: <input id="username"/></label>
    </br>
    <label>Password: <input id="password" type="password"/></label>
    </br>
    <button id="login">Login</button>
</form>
<script>
    document.getElementById("login")
    .addEventListener("click", onLoginButtonClicked);
</script>
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### ./hatermode --off Slate

Then again Slate is:

* Easy to extend
* Data-driven
* People can get used to it

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Slate Architecture

* Implemented in two modules
    - *SlateCore* - implements the framework
    - *Slate* - implements concrete components
* Slate UI is broken down to components, each called a *widget*
* It all starts at `SWidget`
    - The base class for everything Slate-related
    - ** STOP. DO NOT INHERIT DIRECTLY FROM WIDGET! **
    - Implements a great deal of things

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Slate basics

* Requires 3 passes
* Bottom-up traversal: compute widget size
* Top-down traversal: layout children

```
    |<-----------22---------->|
    +-------------------------+
    |     SHorizontalBox      |
    +-------------------------+
      +----=----+ +----=----+
      |    ?    | |    ?    |
      +----+----+ +----+----+
           ^           ^
           |           |
        +--+           +--+
        |                 |
   +----+---------+  +----+--+
   |STextBlock    |  |SImage |
   +---------+----+  +-------+
   |<---- 14----->|  |<--8-->|
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Top-down traversal: paint

```cpp
OutputElements OnPaint( AllottedGeometry )
{
    // Arrange all the children given our allotted geometry
    Array<ArrangedChild> ArrangedChildren = ArrangeChildrenGiven( AllottedGeometry );

    // Paint the children
    for each ( Child in ArrangedChildren )
    {
        OutputElements.Append( Child.Widget.OnPaint( Child.Geometry ) );
    }

    // Paint a border
    OutputElements.Append( DrawBorder() );
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Slate tenets

* Use polling instead of events when possible
* Limit cache usage
* Layout and draw everyting each frame
* It's ok to recreate the **ENTIRE** UI
    - The blueprint editor
* Use `TAttribute` <-- MUCH USEFUL, VERY GOING-TO-BE-ON-THE-TEST
* Use events everywhere

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Data-driveness

```
+-----------------+                         +--------------+
| SEditableText   |                         |           {s}|
+-----------------+                         | Model Data   |
|                 |      /----------\       +--------------+
|         o Text  +<--=--+ ReadData +---=---+              |
|                 |      \----------/       |  item name   |
|                 |      /-----------\      |              |
| o OnTextChanged +---=--+ WriteData +--=-->+              |
|                 |      \-----------/      +--------------+
+-----------------+
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Slate basics

Three important methods:

* `ComputeDesiredSize()` - responsible for desired size.
* `ArrangeChildren()` - responsible for arrangement of children within
the parent's allotted area.
* `OnPaint()` - responsible for appearance. Versatile - can even use materials
to draw!

You also have access `Tick(float)`

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## `SWidget` branches

* `SLeafWidget` - a *final* widget, does one thing and does it good (`STextBlock`, `SImage`)
* `SComponentWidget` - a *composition* of widgets (`SSusiLoginScreen`)
* `SPanel` - a *list* of widgets (`SHorizontalBox`)

All widgets should inherit one of the above!

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Child slots

Slots are at the heart of Slate's composition mechanism

* Slots are objects that allow widgets to be contained
inside other widgets
* `SCompoundWidget` has exactly one slot that's never null (`SNullWidget`)
* `SBoxPanel` has multiple slots

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Creating Slate widgets - Slate++

```cpp
SNew(SHorizontalBox)
    +SHorizontalBox::Slot()
    .HAlign(HAlign_Left)
    .AutoWidth()
    .Padding(10)
    [
        SNew(SBorder)
        .BorderBackgroundColor(ScreenStyle.BackgroundColor)
        .VAlign(VAlign_Fill)
        .HAlign(HAlign_Fill)
        [
            SNew(STextBlock)
            .Text(TEXT("Hakuna matata")
        ]
    ]
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Notes

* Widgets can only be instantiated through the `SNew` macro
* `SNew` can accept arguments
* `SNew` returns `TSharedPtr<SMyWidget>`
* `operator+` adds a slot to a `SPanel`
* `operator[]` adds content to a slot
* `operator[]` in a `SComponentWidget` adds content to the single child slot

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Using Slate widgets

* `#include` *SlateBasics.h* and whatever widgets you are using
    - Remember to add the Slate modules as dependencies!
* Widgets need to be added to the viewport
* Usually done inside the game's HUD class

```cpp
LoginScreen = SNew(SSusiLoginScreen);
this->GetWorld()->GetGameViewport()
    ->AddViewportWidgetContent(LoginScreen.ToSharedRef());
```

* **Important:** Since widgets are only ever passed around in shared
pointers and refs, make sure to release all pointers once you are done with them.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Useful / common widgets

* Panels
    - `SHorizontalBox`
    - `SVerticalBox`
    - `SListView`
    - `SGridPanel` / `SUniformGridPanel`
    - `SScrollBar`
    - `SBorder`
    - `SOverlay`


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Useful / common widgets

* Leafs
    - `STextBlock`
    - `SEditableText`
    - `SImage`
    - `SButton`
    - `SThrobber`

The full list is available as:

```
cat SlateBasics.h SlateExtras.h | grep '#include "S.*'
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Implementing custom widgets

```cpp

class SUSI_API SMyWidget : public SCompoundWidget
{
    SLATE_BEGIN_ARGS(SMyWidget)
        : _Content()
        , _HAlign( EHorizontalAlignment::Left)
        ...
    {}
        /** Horizontal alignment */
        SLATE_ARGUMENT( EHorizontalAlignment, HAlign )

        /** The text to display in this button,
          * if no custom content is specified
          */
        SLATE_ATTRIBUTE( FText, Text )

        /** Slot for this button's content (optional) */
        SLATE_DEFAULT_SLOT( FArguments, Content )

        /** Called when the button is clicked */
        SLATE_EVENT( FOnClicked, OnClicked )

        /** The text style of the button */
        SLATE_STYLE_ARGUMENT( FTextBlockStyle, TextStyle )
    SLATE_END_ARGS()
public:
    void Construct(const FArguments& Args);
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Notes

* `SMyWidget::FArguments` is a macro-generated struct that contains
whatever is in between `SLATE_BEGIN_ARGS` / `SLATE_END_ARGS`
* Args can be read inside `SMyWidget::Construct`
* The `SLATE_XXX` macros declare various common case metatypes
    - Accessible with underscore e.g. `_HAlign`

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Implementing custom widgets (cont.)

```cpp
class SMyWidget : public SComponentWidget
{
    virtual FReply OnKeyDown(const FGeometry& MyGeometry, const FKeyEvent& InKeyEvent) override;
    virtual FReply OnMouseButtonDown( const FGeometry& MyGeometry, const FPointerEvent& MouseEvent ) override;
    virtual FCursorReply OnCursorQuery(const FGeometry& MyGeometry, const FPointerEvent& CursorEvent) const override
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Slate Input

![Cat input](resources/14.ui_ue4/cat_input.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Slate Input

* Events in Slate bubble up
* Override the magical `OnKeyXXX` / `OnMouseXXX` / `OnAnalogValueChanged`
* Return an `FReply`
    - `FReply::Handled()` to stop propagation
    - `FReply::Unhadled()` to continue propagation

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Reasons for implementing your own widgets

* Reusing components
* Clear separation of logic
* Making new leafs / panels

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Slate styles - the CSS to your widgets

```cpp
USTRUCT(BlueprintType)
struct SLATECORE_API FButtonStyle : public FSlateWidgetStyle
{
	/** Button appearance when the button is not hovered or pressed */
	UPROPERTY(EditAnywhere, BlueprintReadWrite, Category=Appearance)
	FSlateBrush Normal;
	FButtonStyle& SetNormal( const FSlateBrush& InNormal );
}
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Widget reflector

![Debugging slate](resources/14.ui_ue4/debugging_slate_oreily.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Extra detail

* Brushes
    - If you are going to draw your own widgets
* `FSlateApplication`
* `FExtender` & `FMenuBuilder`
    - Research how to get into the editor

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Menu builder hint

```cpp
void MyModule::Startup()
{
    MyExtender = MakeShareable(new FExtender);
    MyExtension = Extender->AddMenuBarExtension("Window",
        EExtensionHook::After, PluginCommands,
        FMenuBarExtensionDelegate::CreateRaw(this, &MyModule::AddMenuBarExtension));

    FGenericCommands::Register(); // Required for the successful load of FLevelEditorModule
    FLevelEditorModule& LevelEditorModule = FModuleManager::LoadModuleChecked<FLevelEditorModule>("LevelEditor");
    ExtensibilityManager = LevelEditorModule.GetMenuExtensibilityManager();
    ExtensibilityManager->AddExtender(MyExtender);
}
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Unreal Motion Graphics

* Slate's successor
* Comes with a WYSIWYG editor
* Isn't that terrible actually!
    - Even supports in-world UI!
* Is merely a clever wrapper around Slate

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Creating custom UMG widgets

```cpp
UCLASS(meta=(DisplayName = "Susi Login Screen"))
class SUSI_API USusiLoginScreen : public UWidget
{
	GENERATED_UCLASS_BODY()
public:
	virtual TSharedRef<SWidget> RebuildWidget() override;
	virtual void SynchronizeProperties() override;
#if WITH_EDITOR
	virtual const FText GetPaletteCategory() override;
#endif
protected:
	TSharedPtr<SSusiLoginScreen> SusiWidget;
}
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## [BLUI](https://github.com/AaronShea/BLUI)

* Open-source HTML engine for UE4
* Based on Chromium
* Works in both C++ and BP
* Has JS to UE4 bindings

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## [Coherent GT](http://coherent-labs.com/Documentation/UnrealEngine4-GT/)

![Matrix cat](resources/14.ui_ue4/gt_cat.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Questions?

![Cat vibrating](resources/14.ui_ue4/cat_vibrating.jpg)

Commit message:

Fixed inverted review questions in the UI lectures.

lectures/14.ui_ue4.md, after:

# Game Engine Architecture

## User interface in UE4

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the special about the animation blueprints?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What's root motion?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Contents

- Slate
- UMG
- BLUI
- Coherent GT

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

UE4 currently has two UI systems

- Slate - low-level, C++ driven
- UMG - high-level, WYSIWYG, uses Slate under the hood, came in 4.6

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Slate

* Custom, platform-agnostic
* Used throughout the entire engine
* Declarative syntax (albeit C++)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

> with the ability to easily design, layout, and style
> components that allows for easily creating and iterating on UIs.

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> ![Sealiest thing](resources/14.ui_ue4/sealiest_thing_meme.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

#### ./hatermode --on Slate

* Slate is a one big exception
* Full of macro-magic
* Things don't work as you expect them to more often than not.
    - Like the HTML5 standard but 100 times worse.
* Animations are super easy - just some C++! Super-artisty!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

#### It's declarative!

`SSusiLoginScreep::ConstructInitialLoginScreen`

Vs.

```
<style>
    form {
        background-color: gray;
        border: 1px solid gray;
    }
    * {
        color: red;
        font: 20px Verdana;
    }
</style>
<form>
    <label>Enter your credentials</label>
    </br>
    <label>Username: <input id="username"/></label>
    </br>
    <label>Password: <input id="password" type="password"/></label>
    </br>
    <button id="login">Login</button>
</form>
<script>
    document.getElementById("login")
    .addEventListener("click", onLoginButtonClicked);
</script>
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

#### ./hatermode --off Slate

Then again Slate is:

* Easy to extend
* Data-driven
* People can get used to it

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Slate Architecture

* Implemented in two modules
    - *SlateCore* - implements the framework
    - *Slate* - implements concrete components
* Slate UI is broken down to components, each called a *widget*
* It all starts at `SWidget`
    - The base class for everything Slate-related
    - ** STOP. DO NOT INHERIT DIRECTLY FROM WIDGET! **
    - Implements a great deal of things

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Slate basics

* Requires 3 passes
* Bottom-up traversal: compute widget size
* Top-down traversal: layout children

```
    |<-----------22---------->|
    +-------------------------+
    |     SHorizontalBox      |
    +-------------------------+
      +----=----+ +----=----+
      |    ?    | |    ?    |
      +----+----+ +----+----+
           ^           ^
           |           |
        +--+           +--+
        |                 |
   +----+---------+  +----+--+
   |STextBlock    |  |SImage |
   +---------+----+  +-------+
   |<---- 14----->|  |<--8-->|
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* Top-down traversal: paint

```cpp
OutputElements OnPaint( AllottedGeometry )
{
    // Arrange all the children given our allotted geometry
    Array<ArrangedChild> ArrangedChildren = ArrangeChildrenGiven( AllottedGeometry );

    // Paint the children
    for each ( Child in ArrangedChildren )
    {
        OutputElements.Append( Child.Widget.OnPaint( Child.Geometry ) );
    }

    // Paint a border
    OutputElements.Append( DrawBorder() );
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Slate tenets

* Use polling instead of events when possible
* Limit cache usage
* Layout and draw everyting each frame
* It's ok to recreate the **ENTIRE** UI
    - The blueprint editor
* Use `TAttribute` <-- MUCH USEFUL, VERY GOING-TO-BE-ON-THE-TEST
* Use events everywhere

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Data-driveness

```
+-----------------+                         +--------------+
| SEditableText   |                         |           {s}|
+-----------------+                         | Model Data   |
|                 |      /----------\       +--------------+
|         o Text  +<--=--+ ReadData +---=---+              |
|                 |      \----------/       |  item name   |
|                 |      /-----------\      |              |
| o OnTextChanged +---=--+ WriteData +--=-->+              |
|                 |      \-----------/      +--------------+
+-----------------+
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Slate basics

Three important methods:

* `ComputeDesiredSize()` - responsible for desired size.
* `ArrangeChildren()` - responsible for arrangement of children within
the parent's allotted area.
* `OnPaint()` - responsible for appearance. Versatile - can even use materials
to draw!

You also have access `Tick(float)`

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## `SWidget` branches

* `SLeafWidget` - a *final* widget, does one thing and does it good (`STextBlock`, `SImage`)
* `SComponentWidget` - a *composition* of widgets (`SSusiLoginScreen`)
* `SPanel` - a *list* of widgets (`SHorizontalBox`)

All widgets should inherit one of the above!

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Child slots

Slots are at the heart of Slate's composition mechanism

* Slots are objects that allow widgets to be contained
inside other widgets
* `SCompoundWidget` has exactly one slot that's never null (`SNullWidget`)
* `SBoxPanel` has multiple slots

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Creating Slate widgets - Slate++

```cpp
SNew(SHorizontalBox)
    +SHorizontalBox::Slot()
    .HAlign(HAlign_Left)
    .AutoWidth()
    .Padding(10)
    [
        SNew(SBorder)
        .BorderBackgroundColor(ScreenStyle.BackgroundColor)
        .VAlign(VAlign_Fill)
        .HAlign(HAlign_Fill)
        [
            SNew(STextBlock)
            .Text(TEXT("Hakuna matata")
        ]
    ]
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Notes

* Widgets can only be instantiated through the `SNew` macro
* `SNew` can accept arguments
* `SNew` returns `TSharedPtr<SMyWidget>`
* `operator+` adds a slot to a `SPanel`
* `operator[]` adds content to a slot
* `operator[]` in a `SComponentWidget` adds content to the single child slot

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Using Slate widgets

* `#include` *SlateBasics.h* and whatever widgets you are using
    - Remember to add the Slate modules as dependencies!
* Widgets need to be added to the viewport
* Usually done inside the game's HUD class

```cpp
LoginScreen = SNew(SSusiLoginScreen);
this->GetWorld()->GetGameViewport()
    ->AddViewportWidgetContent(LoginScreen.ToSharedRef());
```

* **Important:** Since widgets are only ever passed around in shared
pointers and refs, make sure to release all pointers once you are done with them.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Useful / common widgets

* Panels
    - `SHorizontalBox`
    - `SVerticalBox`
    - `SListView`
    - `SGridPanel` / `SUniformGridPanel`
    - `SScrollBar`
    - `SBorder`
    - `SOverlay`


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Useful / common widgets

* Leafs
    - `STextBlock`
    - `SEditableText`
    - `SImage`
    - `SButton`
    - `SThrobber`

The full list is available as:

```
cat SlateBasics.h SlateExtras.h | grep '#include "S.*'
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Implementing custom widgets

```cpp

class SUSI_API SMyWidget : public SCompoundWidget
{
    SLATE_BEGIN_ARGS(SMyWidget)
        : _Content()
        , _HAlign( EHorizontalAlignment::Left)
        ...
    {}
        /** Horizontal alignment */
        SLATE_ARGUMENT( EHorizontalAlignment, HAlign )

        /** The text to display in this button,
          * if no custom content is specified
          */
        SLATE_ATTRIBUTE( FText, Text )

        /** Slot for this button's content (optional) */
        SLATE_DEFAULT_SLOT( FArguments, Content )

        /** Called when the button is clicked */
        SLATE_EVENT( FOnClicked, OnClicked )

        /** The text style of the button */
        SLATE_STYLE_ARGUMENT( FTextBlockStyle, TextStyle )
    SLATE_END_ARGS()
public:
    void Construct(const FArguments& Args);
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Notes

* `SMyWidget::FArguments` is a macro-generated struct that contains
whatever is in between `SLATE_BEGIN_ARGS` / `SLATE_END_ARGS`
* Args can be read inside `SMyWidget::Construct`
* The `SLATE_XXX` macros declare various common case metatypes
    - Accessible with underscore e.g. `_HAlign`

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Implementing custom widgets (cont.)

```cpp
class SMyWidget : public SComponentWidget
{
    virtual FReply OnKeyDown(const FGeometry& MyGeometry, const FKeyEvent& InKeyEvent) override;
    virtual FReply OnMouseButtonDown( const FGeometry& MyGeometry, const FPointerEvent& MouseEvent ) override;
    virtual FCursorReply OnCursorQuery(const FGeometry& MyGeometry, const FPointerEvent& CursorEvent) const override
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Slate Input

![Cat input](resources/14.ui_ue4/cat_input.png)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Slate Input

* Events in Slate bubble up
* Override the magical `OnKeyXXX` / `OnMouseXXX` / `OnAnalogValueChanged`
* Return an `FReply`
    - `FReply::Handled()` to stop propagation
    - `FReply::Unhadled()` to continue propagation

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Reasons for implementing your own widgets

* Reusing components
* Clear separation of logic
* Making new leafs / panels

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Slate styles - the CSS to your widgets

```cpp
USTRUCT(BlueprintType)
struct SLATECORE_API FButtonStyle : public FSlateWidgetStyle
{
	/** Button appearance when the button is not hovered or pressed */
	UPROPERTY(EditAnywhere, BlueprintReadWrite, Category=Appearance)
	FSlateBrush Normal;
	FButtonStyle& SetNormal( const FSlateBrush& InNormal );
}
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Widget reflector

![Debugging slate](resources/14.ui_ue4/debugging_slate_oreily.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Extra detail

* Brushes
    - If you are going to draw your own widgets
* `FSlateApplication`
* `FExtender` & `FMenuBuilder`
    - Research how to get into the editor

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Menu builder hint

```cpp
void MyModule::Startup()
{
    MyExtender = MakeShareable(new FExtender);
    MyExtension = Extender->AddMenuBarExtension("Window",
        EExtensionHook::After, PluginCommands,
        FMenuBarExtensionDelegate::CreateRaw(this, &MyModule::AddMenuBarExtension));

    FGenericCommands::Register(); // Required for the successful load of FLevelEditorModule
    FLevelEditorModule& LevelEditorModule = FModuleManager::LoadModuleChecked<FLevelEditorModule>("LevelEditor");
    ExtensibilityManager = LevelEditorModule.GetMenuExtensibilityManager();
    ExtensibilityManager->AddExtender(MyExtender);
}
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Unreal Motion Graphics

* Slate's successor
* Comes with a WYSIWYG editor
* Isn't that terrible actually!
    - Even supports in-world UI!
* Is merely a clever wrapper around Slate

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Creating custom UMG widgets

```cpp
UCLASS(meta=(DisplayName = "Susi Login Screen"))
class SUSI_API USusiLoginScreen : public UWidget
{
	GENERATED_UCLASS_BODY()
public:
	virtual TSharedRef<SWidget> RebuildWidget() override;
	virtual void SynchronizeProperties() override;
#if WITH_EDITOR
	virtual const FText GetPaletteCategory() override;
#endif
protected:
	TSharedPtr<SSusiLoginScreen> SusiWidget;
}
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## [BLUI](https://github.com/AaronShea/BLUI)

* Open-source HTML engine for UE4
* Based on Chromium
* Works in both C++ and BP
* Has JS to UE4 bindings

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## [Coherent GT](http://coherent-labs.com/Documentation/UnrealEngine4-GT/)

![Matrix cat](resources/14.ui_ue4/gt_cat.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Questions?

![Cat vibrating](resources/14.ui_ue4/cat_vibrating.jpg)
