lectures/18.physics_ue4.md, before:

# Game Engine Architecture

## Physics / Collision in UE4

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

How do behaviour trees work in UE4?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

Behaviour trees make use of decorators, services and tasks.
What are they?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the purpose of EQS?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Remember the content examples?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics sim

* PhysX 3.3
* Physics bodies & assets
* Physics Asset Tool (PhAT)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Collision

* Collision bodies
* Diffent components for the different shapes
* Collision responses
    - Block Vs. Overlap Vs. Ignore

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics materials

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics settings

* Gravity fun!
* Addind custom physics types

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics constraints

* As actor or as component
* Hinges, prismatics, ball-and-socket
* Motors
* Damping

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics substepping

* When a single update is not enough

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Character walkable slopes

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Questions?

Commit message:

Added forgotten review questions on physics.

lectures/18.physics_ue4.md, after:

# Game Engine Architecture

## Physics / Collision in UE4

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

How do behaviour trees work in UE4?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

Behaviour trees make use of decorators, services and tasks.
What are they?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the purpose of EQS?
--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

What are bounding volumes / collision primitives?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

Describe the basic algorithm / equations
for computing the position of an object out of forces.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Extended review

Why is `TIME_STEP` a constant?

```cpp
void PhysicsEngine::Step()
{
    const float TIME_STEP = 1 / 60.f;
    ApplyForces();
    SolveDynamics();
    SolveConstraints();
}
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Remember the content examples?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics sim

* PhysX 3.3
* Physics bodies & assets
* Physics Asset Tool (PhAT)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Collision

* Collision bodies
* Diffent components for the different shapes
* Collision responses
    - Block Vs. Overlap Vs. Ignore

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics materials

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics settings

* Gravity fun!
* Addind custom physics types

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics constraints

* As actor or as component
* Hinges, prismatics, ball-and-socket
* Motors
* Damping

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Physics substepping

* When a single update is not enough

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Character walkable slopes

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

Questions?
