lectures/22.tools_ue4.md, before:

# Game Engine Architecture

## Tools

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

Describe as many debugging features as you can think of (besides the code debugger!)

* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Debug drawing
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Debug cameras
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Time control
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Screen capture
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Replays
* <!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Dev menu / console


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

We mentioned that optimization is done on 3 levels. Which are they?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What's the difference between a sampling and an instrumenting profiler?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

We'll skip the allocators' part.

You remember how to enable the debugging allocator, don't you?

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Change to `FPlatformMemory::BaseAllocator` to return `FMallocDebug` instance.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Automation

* Unreal's Automation Tool is part of Unreal Session Frontend
* Provides framework for and runs
    - unit tests
    - feature tests (integration tests)
    - smoke (quick tests)
    - content stress tests
    - screen shot comparison tests

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Adding tests

* Add a *Tests* folder inside */[MyProject]/Source/Private/`
* Add some CPP files implementing the tests which at the minimum requires 2 things:
    - Use the magic macro
    `IMPLEMENT_SIMPLE_AUTOMATION_TEST(TClass, PrettyName, TFlags)`
    - Implement `bool FMyTestClass::RunTest(const FString& Parameters)` which runs the tests

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Logging

1. Create a category

```cpp
DECLARE_LOG_CATEGORY_EXTERN(LogSusi, Log, All);
..
DEFINE_LOG_CATEGORY(LogSusi);
```

2. Log stuff

```cpp
FString MyFavCourse = TEXT("Clifford analysis");
UE_LOG(LogSusi, Warning, TEXT("Susi won't let me join %s", *MyFavCourse);
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Log categories are usually created per module but there's no limitation.

```cpp
DECLARE_LOG_CATEGORY_CLASS(..) // Whether to use a static instance for this logger or not.
DEFINE_LOG_CATEGORY_STATIC(..)
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Logging severities

```cpp
namespace ELogVerbosity
{
	enum Type
	{
		Fatal, // Crashes the program
		Error,
		Warning,
		Display, // Is displayed on the console
		Log,
		Verbose,
		VeryVerbose,
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Tips

You don't have to create a category for everything

```cpp
UE_LOG(LogTemp, Display, TEXT("Here I am using the temp category!"));
```

Remember that you need to pass `TCHAR*`, not `FString`!

```cpp
UE_LOG(LogTemp, Display, TEXT("My arg: %s"), *MyStr);
```

Compilers provide ways of logging the current function

```cpp
#define FUNC_LOG(LogCat, Msg) UE_LOG(LogCat,Warning,TEXT("[%s]: %s"), *FString(__FUNCTION__), Msg)
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Filtering via cmd args

```
-LogCmds="LogSusi verbose, LogWorld off"
```

Filtering via the dev console

```cpp
Log list
Log LogSusi Warning
Log reset
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Output

* */[MyGameDirectory]/Saved/Logs/*
    - whenever a new logging session begins, the previous file
    is backed up
* The Editor's Output Window

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Want more logging? Unreal's got you covered!

![Cat covered lady](resources/12.tools_ue4/cat_covering.jpeg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Printing text on screen

```cpp
UEngine::AddOnScreenDebugMessage(int32 Key, float TimeToDisplay, FColor DisplayColor, const FString& DebugMessage...);

GEngine->AddOnScreenDebugMessage(INDEX_NONE, 1.5f, FColor::Red, FString::FormatAsNumber(42));
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Printing to the dev console

```cpp
auto PlayerController = GWorld->GetFirstPlayerController();
PlayerController->ClientMessage(FString("My Message"), NAME_None, 1.5f);
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

By now you are probably thinking UE4 is the crazy logging lady.

![Crazy cat lady](resources/12.tools_ue4/crazy_cat_lady.jpg)

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Think again.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Visual logging

Launched from *Window* -> *Developer Tools* -> *Visual Logger*
or *LogVis* from the dev console.

Basically allows logging debug drawing commands.

![VisLog](resources/12.tools_ue4/ue4_vis_log.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Integration is done on two steps:

1. [Optional] Override `AActor::GrabDebugSnapshot` to specify what data
you want captured for your actor.
2. Call `UE_VLOG_XXX` whenever you need to log something

```cpp
auto Location = GetActorLocation();
UE_VLOG_LOCATION(this, LogFPChar, Verbose, Location,
    10.f, FColor::Red, TEXT("Actor's firing location: %f, %f, %f"), Location.X, Location.Y, Location.Z);
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Notes

* The visual logger must be enabled prior to any captures.
* Once a VisLog is loaded, it's available during normal play and outside of it.
* Data is captured only once per frame, no matter how many calls to the same `UE_VLOG_XXX` macro are issued.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

You just learnt few new invaluable lessons:

> “The unexplored life is not worth living!” - Plato
> “Life is an experiment in which you may fail or succeed. Explore more, expect least.”  ― Santosh Kalwar
> "Explore the marvelous wonders of *Window* -> *Developer Tools* - Nikola Dimitroff

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Crash reporting

* UE4 has its own awesome crash reporter!

![Dancing cat](resources/12.tools_ue4/cat_dancing.gif)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* ...and it is only available to Epic

![Grumpy cat](resources/12.tools_ue4/grumpy_cat.gif)

* But, hey, it's open source! Modify *CrashReportClient.exe* to send
the crash reports to you!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

On the bright side - you can still inspect the crashes:

* Stored in */Saved/Crashes/* when running in the editor
* Stored in *%APPDATA%/Microsoft/Windows/WER/ReportQueue* when running in a cooked build
* The crash log consists of:
    - *diagnostics.txt* - contains the callstack
    - *minidump.dmp* - a minidump without heap
    - *[ProjectName].log* - the log file of the game

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## GPU Debugging

Disable parts of the rendering

* <kb>F1</kb> -> Draw only wireframe
* <kb>F2</kb> -> Disable lightning, render only ambients
* <kb>F3</kb> -> Back to normal
* Check the rendering visualizers panel

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Debug drawing

*DrawDebugHelpers.h* is your friend

```cpp
DrawDebugCoordinateSystem(GetWorld(), Location, FRotator::ZeroRotator, 20.f, false, 10.f);
```

Supports rendering every primitive you can think of.<sup>1</sup>
<sup>1</sup> Idea for your course project: Offer debug drawing mode


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Screen capture

```
Shot # Screenshot from the currently active camera
HighResShot # Same as above, just 4 times the resolution
HighResShot 2 # 2 times the resolution
HighResShot 1234x4321 # custom resolution
```

`HighResShot` customization can be customized via [HRST](https://docs.unrealengine.com/latest/INT/Engine/Basics/Screenshots/index.html)


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Debug cameras

Eject & Possess

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Time control

```cpp
// Set the time scale
World->GetWorldSettings()->TimeDilation = 0.5f;
// Pause
PlayerController->SetPause(true);
// Play
PlayerController->SetPause(false);
```

Extra fanciness available on demand:

* Pause on a networking game on the server
* Hook up predicates that let confirm whether the game can be unpaused
for a given local player

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Replay

```
DemoRec MyReplay
Demo.TimeDilation 0.5
DemoPlay MyReplay
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## In-game console

Some other useful commands:

```
travel /Game/MyMap # Load a new level
pause # Pause the game
slomo 0.5 # Set time dilation (enter SLOw MOtion)
quit # Quit the game
ce MyCustomEventName # Fire a custom event
r.VSync 1 # Enables VSync, check r. for other rendering settings
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Hooking up custom functions

```cpp
UFUNCTION(exec)
void ComputeTheAnswer();
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `UCheatManager`

* Provides a ton of commands.
* Games should add a cheat manager of their own. Plugins can't.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Profiling

You can't have a AAA Engine without great profiling tools.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Setup

* Disable VSync (`r.VSync 0`)
* Disable / increase the max fps cap (`t.MaxFPS`)
* Profile in the game, not the editor
* `stat unit`
* Are you CPU or GPU bound?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### CPU Bound
#### Investigate what's the causing it

```
stat slow [-ms=0.5] [-maxdepth=5]
stat unitgraph
stat Memory
stat Threads
stat [SpecificCategory]
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### CPU Bound
#### Profile capture

1. Capture a stat file through `stat startfile / stopfile` or
through Unreal Session Frontend.
2. Load and inspect the file through Unreal Session Frontend.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### CPU Bound
#### Stat functions

```cpp
DECLARE_STATS_GROUP(TEXT("SusiShooterCharacter"), STATGROUP_SusiShooter, STATCAT_Advanced);

void SusiShooterMakeBulletHurtPeople()
{

	DECLARE_SCOPE_CYCLE_COUNTER(TEXT("Firing a bullet"), STAT_SusiShooterOnFire, STATGROUP_SusiShooter);
    ...
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### GPU Bound
#### Investigating what's slow

```
profilegpu
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### GPU Bound
#### Hooking up to the profilegpu

```cpp
void FunctionToProfile
{
    SCOPED_DRAW_EVENT(RHICmdList, TEXT("FunctionToProfile"));
}
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

There are more tools in Unreal's swissknife.

* Gameplay Debugger
* Network profiler
* Symbol Debugger
* Class Viewer
* Collision Analyzer
* Widget Reflector
* Blueprint-stuff-doers

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Final thoughts

* How did you like the course?
    - Google form incoming
* Would love to hear further about your projects!
    - Come visit future game dev meetups
        - Also SYSF
    - Share results in the FB group

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Finaler final thoughts

![Kitty thank you](https://cdn.meme.am/instances/500x/58091660.jpg)

Questions?

Commit message:

Reordered review questions so that theory and practice are separated.

lectures/22.tools_ue4.md, after:

# Game Engine Architecture

## Tools

---------------------
[Course Index](http://nikoladimitroff.github.io/Game-Engine-Architecture)

<div class="authors-section">
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Nikola Dimitroff
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-rss"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:nikola@dimitroff.bg"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/nikoladimitroff"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Alexander Angelov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:aleksandar.angelovv@gmail.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/Alekssasho"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>
            Viktor Ketipov
        </td>
        <td>
            <a target="_blank" href="mailto:info@kipiinteractive.com"><i class="fa fa-envelope-o"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/k1p1"><i class="fa fa-github"></i></a>
            <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/xk1p1x"><i class="fa fa-twitter"></i></a></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="companies-section">
<a class="ubisoft-logo" href="https://ubisoft.com" target="_blank"></a>
<br>
<a class="kipi-logo" href="http://kipiinteractive.com" target="_blank"></a>
</div>

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

# Sanity check

We are recording, aren't we?

![kitty cameraman](http://www.catster.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/335f4392f011a80324e09f5ace0b3f57.jpg)

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Review

What's are role, relevance and priority in terms of UE4's networking?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

What does `UPROPERTY(Replicated)` do?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Review

If I have to solve the case of opening a chest networkingly, do I

- Use replicated props?
- Use RPC?
- Use both?

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

We'll skip the allocators' part.

You remember how to enable the debugging allocator, don't you?

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Change to `FPlatformMemory::BaseAllocator` to return `FMallocDebug` instance.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Automation

* Unreal's Automation Tool is part of Unreal Session Frontend
* Provides framework for and runs
    - unit tests
    - feature tests (integration tests)
    - smoke (quick tests)
    - content stress tests
    - screen shot comparison tests

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Adding tests

* Add a *Tests* folder inside */[MyProject]/Source/Private/`
* Add some CPP files implementing the tests which at the minimum requires 2 things:
    - Use the magic macro
    `IMPLEMENT_SIMPLE_AUTOMATION_TEST(TClass, PrettyName, TFlags)`
    - Implement `bool FMyTestClass::RunTest(const FString& Parameters)` which runs the tests

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Logging

1. Create a category

```cpp
DECLARE_LOG_CATEGORY_EXTERN(LogSusi, Log, All);
..
DEFINE_LOG_CATEGORY(LogSusi);
```

2. Log stuff

```cpp
FString MyFavCourse = TEXT("Clifford analysis");
UE_LOG(LogSusi, Warning, TEXT("Susi won't let me join %s", *MyFavCourse);
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Log categories are usually created per module but there's no limitation.

```cpp
DECLARE_LOG_CATEGORY_CLASS(..) // Whether to use a static instance for this logger or not.
DEFINE_LOG_CATEGORY_STATIC(..)
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Logging severities

```cpp
namespace ELogVerbosity
{
	enum Type
	{
		Fatal, // Crashes the program
		Error,
		Warning,
		Display, // Is displayed on the console
		Log,
		Verbose,
		VeryVerbose,
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Tips

You don't have to create a category for everything

```cpp
UE_LOG(LogTemp, Display, TEXT("Here I am using the temp category!"));
```

Remember that you need to pass `TCHAR*`, not `FString`!

```cpp
UE_LOG(LogTemp, Display, TEXT("My arg: %s"), *MyStr);
```

Compilers provide ways of logging the current function

```cpp
#define FUNC_LOG(LogCat, Msg) UE_LOG(LogCat,Warning,TEXT("[%s]: %s"), *FString(__FUNCTION__), Msg)
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Filtering via cmd args

```
-LogCmds="LogSusi verbose, LogWorld off"
```

Filtering via the dev console

```cpp
Log list
Log LogSusi Warning
Log reset
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Output

* */[MyGameDirectory]/Saved/Logs/*
    - whenever a new logging session begins, the previous file
    is backed up
* The Editor's Output Window

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Want more logging? Unreal's got you covered!

![Cat covered lady](resources/12.tools_ue4/cat_covering.jpeg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Printing text on screen

```cpp
UEngine::AddOnScreenDebugMessage(int32 Key, float TimeToDisplay, FColor DisplayColor, const FString& DebugMessage...);

GEngine->AddOnScreenDebugMessage(INDEX_NONE, 1.5f, FColor::Red, FString::FormatAsNumber(42));
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Printing to the dev console

```cpp
auto PlayerController = GWorld->GetFirstPlayerController();
PlayerController->ClientMessage(FString("My Message"), NAME_None, 1.5f);
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

By now you are probably thinking UE4 is the crazy logging lady.

![Crazy cat lady](resources/12.tools_ue4/crazy_cat_lady.jpg)

<!-- .element class="fragment" data-fragment-index="0" --> Think again.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Visual logging

Launched from *Window* -> *Developer Tools* -> *Visual Logger*
or *LogVis* from the dev console.

Basically allows logging debug drawing commands.

![VisLog](resources/12.tools_ue4/ue4_vis_log.jpg)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

Integration is done on two steps:

1. [Optional] Override `AActor::GrabDebugSnapshot` to specify what data
you want captured for your actor.
2. Call `UE_VLOG_XXX` whenever you need to log something

```cpp
auto Location = GetActorLocation();
UE_VLOG_LOCATION(this, LogFPChar, Verbose, Location,
    10.f, FColor::Red, TEXT("Actor's firing location: %f, %f, %f"), Location.X, Location.Y, Location.Z);
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Notes

* The visual logger must be enabled prior to any captures.
* Once a VisLog is loaded, it's available during normal play and outside of it.
* Data is captured only once per frame, no matter how many calls to the same `UE_VLOG_XXX` macro are issued.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

You just learnt few new invaluable lessons:

> “The unexplored life is not worth living!” - Plato
> “Life is an experiment in which you may fail or succeed. Explore more, expect least.”  ― Santosh Kalwar
> "Explore the marvelous wonders of *Window* -> *Developer Tools* - Nikola Dimitroff

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Crash reporting

* UE4 has its own awesome crash reporter!

![Dancing cat](resources/12.tools_ue4/cat_dancing.gif)

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

* ...and it is only available to Epic

![Grumpy cat](resources/12.tools_ue4/grumpy_cat.gif)

* But, hey, it's open source! Modify *CrashReportClient.exe* to send
the crash reports to you!

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

On the bright side - you can still inspect the crashes:

* Stored in */Saved/Crashes/* when running in the editor
* Stored in *%APPDATA%/Microsoft/Windows/WER/ReportQueue* when running in a cooked build
* The crash log consists of:
    - *diagnostics.txt* - contains the callstack
    - *minidump.dmp* - a minidump without heap
    - *[ProjectName].log* - the log file of the game

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## GPU Debugging

Disable parts of the rendering

* <kb>F1</kb> -> Draw only wireframe
* <kb>F2</kb> -> Disable lightning, render only ambients
* <kb>F3</kb> -> Back to normal
* Check the rendering visualizers panel

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Debug drawing

*DrawDebugHelpers.h* is your friend

```cpp
DrawDebugCoordinateSystem(GetWorld(), Location, FRotator::ZeroRotator, 20.f, false, 10.f);
```

Supports rendering every primitive you can think of.<sup>1</sup>
<sup>1</sup> Idea for your course project: Offer debug drawing mode


--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Screen capture

```
Shot # Screenshot from the currently active camera
HighResShot # Same as above, just 4 times the resolution
HighResShot 2 # 2 times the resolution
HighResShot 1234x4321 # custom resolution
```

`HighResShot` customization can be customized via [HRST](https://docs.unrealengine.com/latest/INT/Engine/Basics/Screenshots/index.html)


--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Debug cameras

Eject & Possess

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Time control

```cpp
// Set the time scale
World->GetWorldSettings()->TimeDilation = 0.5f;
// Pause
PlayerController->SetPause(true);
// Play
PlayerController->SetPause(false);
```

Extra fanciness available on demand:

* Pause on a networking game on the server
* Hook up predicates that let confirm whether the game can be unpaused
for a given local player

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

## Replay

```
DemoRec MyReplay
Demo.TimeDilation 0.5
DemoPlay MyReplay
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## In-game console

Some other useful commands:

```
travel /Game/MyMap # Load a new level
pause # Pause the game
slomo 0.5 # Set time dilation (enter SLOw MOtion)
quit # Quit the game
ce MyCustomEventName # Fire a custom event
r.VSync 1 # Enables VSync, check r. for other rendering settings
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Hooking up custom functions

```cpp
UFUNCTION(exec)
void ComputeTheAnswer();
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### `UCheatManager`

* Provides a ton of commands.
* Games should add a cheat manager of their own. Plugins can't.

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Profiling

You can't have a AAA Engine without great profiling tools.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### Setup

* Disable VSync (`r.VSync 0`)
* Disable / increase the max fps cap (`t.MaxFPS`)
* Profile in the game, not the editor
* `stat unit`
* Are you CPU or GPU bound?

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### CPU Bound
#### Investigate what's the causing it

```
stat slow [-ms=0.5] [-maxdepth=5]
stat unitgraph
stat Memory
stat Threads
stat [SpecificCategory]
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### CPU Bound
#### Profile capture

1. Capture a stat file through `stat startfile / stopfile` or
through Unreal Session Frontend.
2. Load and inspect the file through Unreal Session Frontend.

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### CPU Bound
#### Stat functions

```cpp
DECLARE_STATS_GROUP(TEXT("SusiShooterCharacter"), STATGROUP_SusiShooter, STATCAT_Advanced);

void SusiShooterMakeBulletHurtPeople()
{

	DECLARE_SCOPE_CYCLE_COUNTER(TEXT("Firing a bullet"), STAT_SusiShooterOnFire, STATGROUP_SusiShooter);
    ...
}
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### GPU Bound
#### Investigating what's slow

```
profilegpu
```

--- VERTICAL SLIDE ---

### GPU Bound
#### Hooking up to the profilegpu

```cpp
void FunctionToProfile
{
    SCOPED_DRAW_EVENT(RHICmdList, TEXT("FunctionToProfile"));
}
```

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

There are more tools in Unreal's swissknife.

* Gameplay Debugger
* Network profiler
* Symbol Debugger
* Class Viewer
* Collision Analyzer
* Widget Reflector
* Blueprint-stuff-doers

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Final thoughts

* How did you like the course?
    - Google form incoming
* Would love to hear further about your projects!
    - Come visit future game dev meetups
        - Also SYSF
    - Share results in the FB group

--- NEXT SLIDE ---

## Finaler final thoughts

![Kitty thank you](https://cdn.meme.am/instances/500x/58091660.jpg)

Questions?
